+++
title = "०५"

+++
(1.) Parvati, bathed in her hopes by the Trident-holde: burning, in that manner, the mind-born deity in her presence, cursed her beauty in her heart. for beauty has for its guerdon good fortune as regards (the being liked by) one's beloved. 
(2.) She wished to make her beauty fruitful by austeritles, having recourse to concentration; how else, could she secure the two things such love and a husband of that kind. 
3 Mená, hearing that her daughter, who had set her heart on Girisá, was resolved to practise penance, clasped her to her bosom, and spoke dissuading ber from the difficult practice of asceticism 
(4.) In the house are deities such as the heart would desire what a wide difference is there between austerities and thy body The delicate S'irisha flower can bear the tread of a bee but not that of a bird 
(5.) Menâ, though thus exhorting her daughter, whose desire was Inflexible, could not dissuade her from her resolve: who can make a mind firm in its resolution to achieve a desired object or turn back water (rushing) towards a low ground. 
On one occasion that steady-minded girl, begged of her father, who knew her desire, a residence (permission to dwell) in the forest to perform religious austerities till their fruition, through a friend who was her confidante. 
(7.) Being granted permission by her great father, delighted in a persistence worthy of her, she repaired to a peak, full of peacocks, which came to be known by her na ne ever afterwards among the people. 
She, of never-to-be shaken disposition, having given u; her necklace, which rubbed away the sandal paste (or her breast) by its threads, wore a bark garment, tawny like the morning sun, the close union of which with the buds was 1 revented by the elevated breasts.(29) 
(9.) As her face looked pretty by her decorated tresses so it did by the matted hair also; a lotus does not look beautiful only by the swarms of bees but even by its union with moss. 
(10.) By that string of Munja grass having three threads, which she wore for her penance and which (by its harsh touch) caused her hair to stand erect every moment, was the place of the waistband made red, being fastened there for the first time on that occasion. 
…
(17.) The sacred grove too became boly, where the previous antipathy between warring beasts was abandoned, where the guests (travellers) were well gratified with the 
(30) 
(gifts of) desired fruit by the trees, and where the sacred fires were kindled in newly built buts of leaves. 
(18.) When she thought the desired fruit not to be attainable by that kind of penance which she had been already practising, then, disregardful of the delicacy of her body, she began a mightier penance. 
(19.) She, who was fatigued even by playing with the ball, entered upon the course of life of anchorites: verily her body was composed of gold lotuses, as it was delicate by nature and yet touch (full of substance). 
(20.) 
In summer, she of sweet smiles and delicate waist, sitting in the midst of four blazing fires, gazed at the sun (the source of life) with her sight not directed to any thing else, having got the better of (being accustomed to bear) his lustre that dazzles the eye. 
(21.) Then her face scorched by the rays of the sun ir that manuer, bore the Leauty of a day lotus; but gradually round the long corners of her eyes only dark colour made its appearance. 
(22.) Only the water that came to her without any effort on her part, and the rays of the moon (lit. Lord of the constellations), full of nectar, broke her fast, not unlike the means of subsistence of the trees. 
(23.) She, extremely heated by various fires-that wandering in the sky and those lighted by means of fuel, being drenched with the fresh showers at the end of summer, gave out, along with the earth (reeking) heat that ascended upwards. 
(24.) The drops of first water (showers) rested for a moment on her eye-lashes, then sriking against the netherlip, broke as they fell on the elevation of ber breasts; and theuce stumbling through the threefolds of her skin, reach. ed, after a long delay, her navel. 
(25.) The nights, the witnesses of the rigid penance of her who slept on a (bare) stone slab, and who lived in open space (lit. not under a sheltered roof) and in the midst of unceasing showers accompanied by winds, watched her, as it were, with their glances in the shape of lightning (flashes). 
(31) 
(26.) Determinately standing in water she passed the nights of Pansha (cold season) with (winter) winds scattering about a thick mass of snowy sleet, pitying the pair of the Chakravaka birds (which stood) before her, separated and crying to each other. 
(27.) At night, she replaced the (beauty of) lotuses, of the waters (of the stream), the wealth of lotuses of which was destroyed by the showers of snow, by her face, as fragrant as the lotus (itself) and shining with the quivering leaf of the nether lip. 
(28.) 
The sternest severity of austerities lies in subsisting on leaves fallen from the trees of their own accord; but that also she spurued; hence was that gentle-talker named Aparna by those conversant with history. 
(29.) 
By this and other kinds of penance, she, wasting her frame delicate as a lotus fibre, day and night, left far behind the tapas practised by auchorites with hardened frames. 
(30.) Then a certain ascetic (lit, one with matted hair ) wearing an antelope's skin, and holding a staff of Palàsha, of ripe speech and burning, as it were. (refulgent) with Brahmanic lustre, entered the penance forest, like the first stage of life (Brahmacharya) embodied. 
(31.) 
To meet him went forth, offering worship with great reverence, Parvati, kindly disposed towards (all) guests; even when there is equality, the acts of the firmminded towards special personages are such as are full of 
extreme reverence. 
(32.) Having accepted the worship (hospitality) performed according to proper rites, and apparently eased his fatigue for a moment he, looking at Umà with quite pure eyes, began to speak to her, not forgetting proper manners. 
(33.) Are sacrificial wood and Kus'a grass easily obtainable for holy rites? Is the water suitable for thy bathing? Dost thou practise austerities proportionate to thy strength ? For the body is the ultimate means of performing religious duties. 
(34.) 
Are the young leaves of these creepers made to sprout by the water sprinkled by thee, thriving ?-the leaves 
(32) 
which vie with thy nether lip, red though long bereft of the scarlet of Alaktaka (red lac. ) 
(35.) Is thy mind pleasingly disposed towards the fawns, who take the Kus'a grass from thy hands through their love (for thee) and who, O lotus-eyed one, present a close resemblance to thy eyes with their unsteady glances ? 
(36.) O Mountain-born lady, the observation that beauty never leads to a sinful course of life is not false (lit. not a deviation from a general rule) as, O thou of noble form, thy conduct has become worthy of imitation even for the ascetics. 
(37.) This Up-holder of the earth (Mountain) together with his family, has not been so sanctified by the waters of the Ganges, dropping from the firmament and resplendent with the offerings of flowers scattered by the seven (heavenly) Sages, as he has been by thy pure acts (lit. free from the taint of sin). 
(38.) O thou of pure intentions, on account of this thy. conduct, pursuit of religion strikes me pre-eminently as the best of the group of the three (viz. Dharma, Artha and Kàma), as this only has been selected and followed by thee, with a mind from which all thought of Artha (wealth) and Kama (desire) has been sent out. 
• 
(39.) 
It does not behove thee to regard me as a stranger, To whom special hospitality was accorded by thee; for, O thon of stooping body, the friendship of good people is de clared to be formed after seven words have been exchanged between them (or seven steps gone over together). 
(40.) Hence, O thou to whom penance is a reasure, I, whom curiosity, natural to the twice-born (a Brahmana), - roused, au desirous of asking something to thee, a lady -f great forbearance. If it be not a secret, thou wilt kindly give a reply. 
(41.) Thy birth is in the family of the first progenitor of mankind); thy shape is as if the manifestation of the collected beauty of the three worlds, the happiness of afflunce is not for thee to seek; and thine is fresh youth; say what blessings, other than these, can be the reward of 
Penance. 
(42.) Such a course of action is possibly followed by high- 
( 33 ) 
minded ladies when overtaken by an unbearable evil; but such a one, O thon of slender waist, can not be discovered in thy case by the mind directed through the channel of thought. 
(43.) O thou of beautiful brows, this thy form is incapable of the humillation of grief; and whence can there be dis-respectful treatment under the parental roof? Nor can there be any insult from strangers; for who can stretch his hand to snatch away the jet of the lustre of the serpent's gem? 
(44.) 
Why is it that thou hast put on a bark garment suitable to old age (only), in youth, abandoning ornaments Say if the night at its beginning, with the moon and the stars prominently displayed, can hint at the ( approach of) dawn. 
(45.) 
If thou art seeking heaven, boot-less is thy effort the regions (on the slopes ) of thy father are the land of gods; if thou dost desire a (suitable) husband, cease from thy austerities; a jewel is sought after and has not to seek. 
(46.) Thy hot sighs have betrayed (the secret); and yet my mind is still more plunged in doubts ; I see not that a husband is at all to be sought after by thee; how then can there be one who is unobtainable when sought after. 
(47.) The youth thou yearnest after is, indeed, hardhearted, since he still holds off, seeing the matted hair. tawny like the tips of the blades of paddy, hanging loosely on thy broad cheeks from which the ear-lotus has been long missing. 
(48.) Of what person, having a heart, the mind is not afflicted, on seeing thee, extremely emaciated by the observance of saintly vows, with the places of ornaments burni mercilessly by the sun and therefore looking like the crescent of the moon by day ? 
(49.) 
I take thy lover to be cheated by the pride of his beauty who does not, for a long time, make his face the mark for ( present himself to the view of) thy eyes of lovely looks and arching eyeslashes. 
(50.) O Gauri, how long wilt thou torture thyself? I too have religious merit accumulated in my peviourst stage of life; do thou get thy desired husband by (the grant of } half of it; him, however. I desire to know well (fully) 
(34) 
(51.) She, thus addressed by the Brahmana, who had divined the inmost secret ( of her heart), could not speak out the desire of her heart (through bashfulness). So she only looked at her friend standing by her side with eyes not besmeared with collyrium. 
(52.) Her friend said to the ascetic-O sage, know thou then, if such is thy curiosity, him for whom this lady has made her body a means for practising religious austerities, as one should a lotus for warding off the sun. 
(53.) This lady, disdaining all the lords of the four quarters, Mahendra and others, of exalted dignity, seeks a husband in the Trident-holder, who is not to be conquered by charms, as is evinced by his destruction of the mind-born. 
(54.) The arrow of the Flower-bewed god, whose point failed to reach the enemy of the l'uras, being first hurled back with the Hunkára sound, difficult to be borne, struck her in the heart with a cruel blow, although his body had been destroyed. 
(55.) From that time forth, powerfully affected by love, and with her curling tresses whitened by the sandal paste on her forehead, the maiden never felt ease even when reclining on the surfaces, of snow-slabs while in her father's 
house. 
(56.) Many a time did she make the daughters of the Kinnara kings, her companions in the songs sung in the woods, burst into tears, by her words ( of grief) scarcely articulate in the throat choking with tears, while the exploits of the Pináka-holder were being sung. 
(57.) At night, when the third part was still remaining, she could scarcely close her eyes for a moment, when all of a sudden she would start up with incoherent cries of—"O Thou of azure neck, where dost thou go?" and would throw her arms tight round an imaginary neck. 
(58.) 
And He of the cresent-crest, drawn with her own hands by this silly girl, was upbraided in private with the words: Thou hast been considered all-pervading by the wise; how, then, dost thou not know this person, slave to thy love? 
}} 
(59.) When at last she could find no other way to win the Lord of the universe though deliberately searching, she 
( 35 ) 
came with us to this sacred forest for practising austerities permitted by her father. 
(60.) 
This our friend has seen fruit appearing on these trees (planted) (lit. given birth to) by herself and the witnesses of her austerities: and yet the craving of her heart, which has for its basis the moon-crested God, does not seem even to be near sprouting time (about to bear fruit). 
(61.) 
I do not know when he, difficult to be secured :hough sought after, will favour this our friend, worn by penance and looked at by us, her friends, with tears, as Indra favours (with showers) the earth, distressed by his holding off (the rain). 
(62.) Thus informed by her, who knew the secrets of Pârvati's heart, so as to make her noble intention clear, that handsome Brahmacharin, without showing signs of delight, asked Umà whether it was so or a joke. 
(63.) Then the daughter of the mountain, putting the rosary of crystal beads on (or into) her forehand, with the fingers drawn together so as to resemble a bud, spoke, with great difficulty, in measured words, having adjusted her speech (in her mind) for a long time. 
(64.) O thou, worshipped of those who know the Vedas, thou hast heard the truth (lit. as it is); this (humble) These person is ambitious of attaining the highest post. austerities are a means of getting that: nothing is in accessible to desire (fancy). 
(65.) Then said the ascetic-Mahes'wara is well known: and yet thou hast a yearning after him; knowing him possess a love for inauspitious things, I cannot see my way to approve of thy desire. 
(66.) O thou who hast fixed (thy mind) on a worthless object, how can this thy hand with the nuptial string still tied round it, bear the first clasp of S'ambhu's hand decked with circling snakes? 
(67.) Do thou thyself consider adequately whether these two things can ever bear being together the bridal 
+ 
( 36 ) 
silks gleaming with the (figures of) swans and the elephanthide dripping with blood? 
(68.) Who, even an enemy, consent (to see) the footprints, leaving marks of red vermeil of thy feet treading upon flowers in the saloon, traced upon the ground of the dead spread over with hair? 
(69.) Say-Is there any thing more ungainly than this that the ashes of the funeral pyres easy to be obtained from the bosom of the three-eyed God will make their home on thy bosom, a (fitting) place for sandal wood paste? 
(70.) Then again this another humiliation will await thee-great men will have smiling countenances, on seeing thee, fit to be borne by a lordly elephant, striding the bull, after marriage. 
(71.) By their earnest (desire) for union with the Tridentholder, two things have now become objects of commiseration: the digit of the (moon) and thyself, the moonlight of the eyes of the world. 
(72.) His body is (deformed) having monstrous eyes, his descent is obscure (not to be found out), and his wealth is shown by his having the quarters for a garment. O thou having eyes like those of a young gazelle, is whatever expected in a husband found in the three-eyed One, even taken singly? 
(73.) 
Turn thy heart from this evil desire; what a disance is there between one of that kind, and thee with auspicious marks? A gibbet of the burial ground is not expected to be treated with the Vedic rites proper for a sacrificial post, by the good. 
(74.) By her, whose anger could be guessed from her quivering nether lip, were cast askance upon the twiceborn, talking adversely, her eyes, red at the corners, 
with a hown gathered on the creeper like-brows. 
(75.) And him she thus addressed: -"Indeed thou dost not know Hara aright, since thou talkest thus to me. The dullwitted find fault with the course of life of the magnanimous, which is not in common with that of other people, and the motive of which is difficult to divine.” 
( 37 ) 
(76.) Auspicious things are resorted to by one, who is anxious to ward off calamities or to attain prosperity. What has he, who is the protector of the world and has nothing to wish for, to do with these, which corrupt the functions of the mind by generating desires? 
(77.) Himself poor, he is the spring of wealth; living (lit. found) in the cremation ground (the above of the dead) he is the lord of the three worlds; of terrible form he is called S'iva (of gentle aspect). None are there who know the Trident-holder for what he is, 
(78.) The shape of one whose form is the universe can not be determined: It may be resplendent with ornaments or entwined with serpents, dressed in the elephant-hide or again in silken garments, or it may have a vessel of skull or the moon on the crest. 
(79.) Certainly the particles of the ashes of the funeral pyre even become sanctifying by having obtained a touch of his body; and hence are held on the head by the dwellers of heaven when dropped in the act of exhibiting the gestures of dancing. 
(80.) Indra, having for his vehicle the rutting elephant of the (eastern) quarter, touches, with his crest, the feet of that poor God, who goes about on the bull and makes their toes red with the pollen-dust of the full-blown flowers of the heavenly trees. 
(81.) Thou, of depraved soul, although wishing to speak the faults of the Lord, hast said one good thing about him. How can he, who is considered the parent of even the selfexistent Brahmá, have his origin known? 
(82.) Though of disputing let him be, without any reservation, what you have heard him to be, My heart, however, is set on him, pervaded by the one sentimet of love; one, who wants to act as one likes, does not regard (care for) criticism (Ill-talk ). 
(83.) O friend, stop this boy who seems desirous of saying something as his upper lip quivers. Not only he, who talks ill of the mighty, but also he who listens to him is a sinner. 
K. T. 4 
(38) 
(84.) Or rather I will bence; so saying the malden, with the bark garment slipping from her bosom, started and the bull-emblemed God, with a smile, held her having discovered his self. 
(85.) On seeing him, all a-trembling and her body covered with perspiration, the daughter of the Mountain-lord, having one foot raised to tread, was uncertain whether to go or to stay, like a river, hampered by the impediment of a mountain in the path. 
+( 
(86.) O thou of stooping limbs, henceforth I am thy slave bought by thy austerities"-as the Moon-crested God said these words, she forgot all her exhaustion caused by the austertles at once: fatigue gives fresh vigour again by the fruition (the achievement of the desired object ). 