+++
title = "03 Abbreviations and Symbols"

+++


- a.	...	The first hemistich of a verse.
- Abhi.	 	Bhāsa’s Abhiṣekanāṭaka.
- AD.	...	Nandikeśvara’s Abhinayadarpaṇa.
- A. dy.	...	Arthadyotanikā, Rāghavabhaṭṭa’s commentary on the Śakuntalā.
- Ag., Abhinava	...	Abhinavagupta or his commentary of the Nāṭyaśāstra.
- AMg.	...	Ardhamāgadhī.
- Apte.	...	Apte’s Sanskrit-English Dictionary
- Avi.	...	Bhāsa’s Avimāraka.
- AŚ.	...	Kauṭilya’s Arthaśāstra (ed. Jolly).
- AŚ. notes.	...	Kauṭilya's Arthaśāstra (ed. Jolly). Vol. II.
- B.	...	Baroda ed. of the Nāṭyaśāstra.
- b.	...	The second hemistich of a verse.
- Bāla.	...	Bhāsa’s Bālacarita.
- Bd.	...	Bṛhaddeśī
- Bhāmaha.	...	Bhāmaha’s Kāvyālaṃkāra.
- BhNC.	...	Bhāsa-nāṭaka-cakra ed. by C. R. Devadhar
- BhP.	...	Śāradātanaya’s Bhāvaprakāśana.
- C.	...	Chowkhamaba (Benares) edition of the Nāṭyaśāstra.
- c.	...	The third hemistich in a stanza.
- Cāru.	...	Bhāsa’s Cārudatta.
- CSS.	...	Chandaḥ-sāra-saṃgraha.
- D., Dattila	...	Dattila’s work on music
- Daṇḍin.	...	Daṇḍin’s Kāvyadarśa.
- def.	...	Definition or definitions.
- De’s Ms.	...	The Ms. of the Abhinavagupta’s commentary (Abhinavabhāratī) belonging to Dr. S. K. De.
- DR.	...	Dhanañjaya’s Daśarūpa,
- Dūtagha.	...	Bhāsa’s Dūtaghaṭotkaca.
- Dūtavā.	...	Bhāsa’s Dūtavākya.
- Ex.	...	Example or examples.
- Foundation.	...	Nobel’s Foundation of Indian Poetry.
- G.	...	J. Grosset’s edition of the Nāṭyaśāstra.
- GOS.	...	Gaikwar’s Oriental Series.
- GS. I.	...	Gītasūtrasāra (Bengali)
- GS. II.	...	Gītasūtrasāra (English Summary)
- Haas.	...	Haas’s translation of the Daśarūpa.
- I. Ant.	...	Indian Antiquary.
- IHQ.	...	Indian Historical Quarterly.
- ID., Ind. Dr.	...	Sten Konow’s Indische Drama.
- Itihāsa.	...	Hāldār’s Vyākaraṇa-darśaner Itihāsa.
- jdl.	...	Journal of the Dept, of Letters,
- JK.	...	Calcutta University. Vidyālaṃkāra’s Jīvanīkośa.
- K.	...	Kāvyamāla ed. of the Nāṭyaśāstra.
- KA.	...	Hemacandra’s Kāvyānuśāsana.
- Karṇa.	...	Bhāsa’s Karnabhāra.
- Kavi.	...	Ramakrishna Kavi or his commentary to the ch. XVII. of tha NŚ.
- KM.	...	Kāvyamālā Series
- Kn.	...	Catura-Kallinātha, a commentator of the Saṅgītaratnākara
- KS.	...	Vātsyāyana’s Kāmāsūtra.
- Kumāra.	...	Kalidasa’s Kumārasambhava.
- Kuṭṭa.	...	Dāmodaragupta’s Kuṭṭanīmata.
- Lévi,	...	Sylavain Lévi's Le Théâtre indien.
- Madhyama.	...	Bhāsa’s Madhyamavyāyoga.
- Mālati.	...	Bhavabhūti’s Mālatīmādhava.
- Mālavi.	...	Kālidāsa’s Mālvikāgnimitra.
- Megh.	...	Meghadūta
- MG.	...	Coomaraswamy’s Mirror of Gestures.
- MH.	...	Music of Hindostan
- MI.	...	Music of India
- MM.	...	Mirror of Music
- Mṛcch.	...	Śūdraka’s Mṛcchakaṭika.
- Mudrā.	...	Viśākhadatta’s Mudrārākṣasa.
- Nāś.	...	Nāradīya-śikṣā
- Nātakalakṣaṇa. NL.,	...	Sāgaranandin’s Nāṭakalakṣaṇaratnakośa.
- ND.	...	Rāmacandra and Guṇacandra’s Nāṭyadarpaṇa.
- NIA.	...	New Indo-Aryan.
- Nitti-Dolci.	...	Nitti-Dolci’s Le Grammairiens Prakrit.
- NŚ.	...	Nāṭyaśāstra.
- P.	...	Purāṇa.
- Pañc.	...	Pañcarātra
- Pāṇ.	...	Pāṇini.
- Piṅgala.	...	Pāṅgala’s Chandaḥsūtra.
- Pischel.	...	Pischel’s Grammatik der Prakrit-sprachen.
- Pr. P.	...	Prākṛta-Paiṅgala.
- Pr.	...	Prātiśākhya.
- Prak.	...	Prakarana.
- Pratimā.	...	Bhāsa’s Pratimā-nāṭaka.
- Pratijñā.	...	Bhāsa’s Pratijñā-yaugandharāyaṇa.
- PŚ.	...	Pāṇinīya-Śikṣā.
- PSM.	...	Pāia-sadda-mahaṇṇavo.
- R., Rām.	...	Rāmāyaṇa.
- Ratnā.	...	Harṣa’s Ratnāvalī.
- ṚS.	...	Kālidāsa’s Ṛtusaṃhāra.
- Śak.	...	Kālidāsa’s Abhijñānaśakuntala.
- Sbh.	...	Siṅghabhūpāla, a commentator of the Saṅgītaratnākara
- SD.	...	Sāhityadarpaṇa.
- ŚD.	...	Śārṅgadeva
- SM.	...	Saṅgītamakaranda
- SR.	...	Śārṅgadeva’s Saṃgītaratnākara.
- Śṛ. Pr.	...	Bhoja’s Śṛṅgāraprakāśa.
- Svapna.	...	Bhāsa’s Svapavāsavadattā.
- tr., trans.	...	translation or translated.
- Uttara.	...	Uttararāmacarita of Bhavabhūti.
- Ūru.	...	Bhāsa’s Ūrubhaṅga.
- Vikram.	...	Kālidāsa’s Vikramorvaśīya.
- Winternitz.	...	Winternitz’s History of Indian Literature.

*N.B*. 

(a) Numerals preceding the paragraphs of the translation relate to the serial number of couplets in the original. When the same number is repeated in two consecutive paragraphs, in the first place it will indicate the first hemistich and in the second the second hemistich. Roman figures relate to the chapter of the NS.

\(b\) For the manner of referring to dramas, see under the Bhāsanātaka-cakra in the’Bibliography (Original Texts).

\(c\) In the footnotes to the Introduction long vowels, cerebral sounds and the labial sibilant have been indicated by italics.


