<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en"
xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
   <title>Madhurā Vijayam</title>
   <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/mv.css" />
</head>
<body>
<div class="page">

<div id="c6_p1" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
अथ वरतनुभिः समं कदाचि-<br />
द्विरचयितुं कुसुमापचायलीलाम् ।<br />
प्रमदवनममर्त्यकामिनीभि-<br />
र्हरिरिव नन्दनमासदन्नरेन्द्रः ॥ १ ॥ पुष्पिताग्रा
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
One day thereafter<br />
the King set out to the pleasure grove<br />
to pass the time in picking flowers<br />
with his graceful queens –<br />
just as the noble Indra sets out for his garden Nandana<br />
with heaven’s beauties.
<span class="ncol">1</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c6_p2" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
मुखरितमणिमेखलाकलापाः<br />
प्रचलितमन्वचलंस्तमायताक्ष्यः ।<br />
उपवनलतिका इवोपगीत-<br />
भ्रमरकुला मलयाद्रिगन्धवाहम् ॥ २ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
As he strode ahead,<br />
the oval-eyed ladies,<br />
jingling with jewel-girt girdles,<br />
trailed in his wake –<br />
just as garden creepers,<br /> 
humming with bees,<br />
trail the Malaya breeze.
<span class="ncol">2</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c6_p3" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
अजनयदवनीश्वरस्य चेत-<br />
स्यसितदृशां मणिनूपुरप्रणादः ।<br />
सहपरिचलितप्रसूनकेतो-<br />
रवनमदैक्षवचापघोषशङ्काम् ॥ ३ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
The King mistook<br />
the peal of the ornamented anklets<br />
worn by the dark-eyed girls<br />
for the sound of the sugarcane bow<br />
as if Kāma,<br />
moving among them,<br />
were readying his aim.
<span class="ncol">3</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c6_p4" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
अवनिपतिमनु प्रतस्थुषीणां<br />
हरिणदृशामितरेतरप्रसक्ताः ।<br />
मधुरसमधुरा गिरस्तदानीं<br />
बहुविधभङ्गितरङ्गिता बभूवुः ॥ ४ ॥
</p>
<p>
<audio controls="controls">
  <source src="audio/6_4.m4a" type="audio/mpeg" />
  Your browser does not support the audio tag.
</audio> 
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
As they followed their lord,<br />
the doe-eyed women,<br />
voices sweet as seeping honey,<br />
chattered each to her neighbour,<br />
their many-wayed words like waves.
<span class="ncol">4</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c6_p5" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
वरतनु परतः प्रयाहि मन्दं<br />
हरिणदृशां पुरतः प्रयायिनीनाम् ।<br />
पथि गतिरयशीर्णहारमुक्ता-<br />
मणिगणशर्करिले पदं न कुर्याः ॥ ५ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
‘Step to the side there –<br />
slowly now, my love!<br />
Mind you don’t tread here –<br />
the plenteous pearl necklaces coming loose<br />
as the doe-eyed women ahead pick up pace<br />
are making a gravel of the place.’
<span class="ncol">5</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c6_p6" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
नलिनमुखि न बोधय प्रसुप्ता-<br />
निह मणिनूपुरशिञ्जितेन हंसान् ।<br />
द्रुतगमनविघातमाचरेयु-<br />
र्नियतममी तव पादपद्मलग्नाः ॥ ६ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
‘Look out, lady of the lotus face!<br />
Don’t awaken the *haṃsas*<br />
fast asleep here<br />
with the ringing of your jewelled anklets.<br />
They’d be sure to cling to your feet,<br />
which look so like lotuses,<br />
and stop you from hurrying ahead.’<span class="ref"><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c6_en1">1</a></sup></span>
<span class="ncol">6</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c6_p7" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
करनखरमरीचिमञ्जरीभि-<br />
र्हतहृदयो जलशङ्क‍या कुरङ्गः ।<br />
अनुपतति विलोकयैकवारं<br />
सखि नियतं स निवर्तते विलक्षः ॥ ७ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
‘An antelope is following you,<br />
hopelessly hypnotised<br />
by the shimmering sheen of your fingernails,<br />
which he takes to be water.<br />
Oh do have a look, dear!<br />
He has scampered off,<br />
evidently embarrassed.’
<span class="ncol">7</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c6_p8" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
शशिमुखि शशिकान्तकुट्टिमेषु<br />
स्खलनभिया न पदात् पदं प्रयासि ।<br />
इयमिह वदनानुबिम्बराजि-<br />
स्तव न पुनर्नवपङ्कजोपाहरः ॥ ८ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
‘Is it for fear of slipping<br />
on the moonstone-paved path,<br />
my moon-faced girl,<br />
that you falter over footstep after footstep?<span class="ref"><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c6_en2">2</a></sup></span><br />
And this is the reflection<br />
repeated over and over<br />
of your own face;<br />
not a fresh offering of blown lotus flowers.’
<span class="ncol">8</span>
</p>
</div>

<p class="it">
Our text breaks off shortly after this verse and resumes with  
Kampa playing games with his wives in a lake.
</p>

<div id="c6_p9" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
अवनिपतिरसिक्त दीर्घिकायां<br />
मुखकमलं सलिलेन साभिलाषम् ।<br />
किमपि समधिकार्द्रपक्ष्मलेखं<br />
वदनमभूदरुणेक्षणं परस्याः ॥ ९ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
The King,<br />
lusting after one girl,<br />
splashed her lotus face with water.<br />
But it was another whose<br />
eyelashes ran wet<br />
and eyes turned red.
<span class="ncol">9</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c6_p10" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
सलिलहतिभियापवृत्तगात्र्याः<br />
प्रचलितवेण्यपराङ्गकं परस्याः ।<br />
धरणिपतिरमंस्त मीनकेतोः<br />
फलकमुपाहितखड्गवल्लरीकम् ॥१० ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
As another girl turned away,<br />
fearing a slap of water,<br />
the King believed the braid whipping across her back<br />
was the fish-bannered Kāma’s sword<br />
swinging across his shield.
<span class="ncol">10</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c6_p11" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
विशदमधरमक्ष्यनञ्जनाभं<br />
विगतललाम वितन्वती ललाटम् ।<br />
रतिरिव जलकेलिरङ्गनाना-<br />
मवनिपतेः स्पृहणियतामयासीत् ॥ ११ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
Wiping the paint from his wives’ lips,<br />
the alluring collyrium from their eyes<br />
and the decorative dot forthwith from their foreheads –<br />
just as lovemaking does –<br />
these watersports enthralled the King.
<span class="ncol">11</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c6_p12" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
अपि दयिततमेन वारिताभि-<br />
र्गृहसरसो विजहे न वारि ताभिः ।<br />
परिलुलितललामचर्चिकाभि-<br />
र्विहृतिरसान्महिलामचर्चिकाभिः ॥ १२ ॥
</p>
<p>
<audio controls="controls">
  <source src="audio/6_12.m4a" type="audio/mpeg" />
  Your browser does not support the audio tag.
</audio> 
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
Though many a time did their beloved ask,<br />
they left not their much-loved bask,<br />
their *tilaka* and sandal paste in every way faded,<br />
those beautiful wives of his in no way jaded.
<span class="ncol">12</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c6_p13" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
अथ विहरणखेदमन्थराभिः<br />
सह निरगात्सरसो नृपः प्रियाभिः ।<br />
कलशजलनिधेरिवाप्सरोभि-<br />
र्विबुधतरुर्मथनश्रमालसाभिः ॥ १३ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
At length from the water the Lord with his lovers emerged<br />
after their energetic play exhausted,<br />
just as<br />
from the milk sea the divine tree with the *apsarases* surfaced<br />
after such frenetic churning fatigued.
<span class="ncol">13</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c6_p14" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
चिकुरनियमनेषु कामिनीना-<br />
मभिनववस्त्रपरिग्रहान्तरेषु ।<br />
अभिमतपददर्शनैरयत्नै-<br />
रतिमदनं स्वममंस्त कम्पराजः ॥ १४ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
As his voluptuous wives tied their hair<br />
and changed into fresh clothes,<br />
King Kampa considered himself luckier than Kāma<br />
to be granted a glimpse<br />
of those spots he longed to see,<br />
without lifting a finger.
<span class="ncol">14</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c6_p15" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
ततः सैरन्ध्रीभिः कृतसमुचिताकल्परचनः<br />
पुरन्ध्रीभिः सार्धं समधिगतशुद्धान्तवसतिः ।<br />
त्रयीगीतं तेजस्त्रिपुरहरमाराध्य विधिव-<br />
द्यथार्हैर्व्यापारैर्नरपतिरहःशेषमनयत् ॥ १५ ॥ शिखरिणी
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
Then the King, suitably attired by the dress-maidens,<br />
entered the inner quarters with the eldest matrons.<br />
There he worshipped,<br />
in accordance with *śāstra*,<br />
the divine light to whom the triple *Vedas* pay tribute,<br />
tormentor of Tripura<span class="ref"><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c6_en3">3</a></sup></span>,<br />
and spent the rest of the day in fitting occupations.
<span class="ncol">15</span>
</p>
</div>

[^1]: *Haṃsas* are attracted to the sound of anklets as well as being fond of lotuses.
[^2]: Moonstones ooze water upon seeing the moon.
[^3]: Śiva

</div>
</body>
</html>
