<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en"
	xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
   <title>Madhurā Vijayam</title>
   <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/mv.css" />
</head>
<body>
<div class="page">

<div id="c5_p1" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">	
		अथ स तत्र महीतलमण्डने<br />
		मरकताह्वयभाजि महापुरे ।<br />
		विरचितस्थितिरप्रतिशासनं<br />
		जगदशेषमरक्षदनाकुलम् ॥ १ ॥ द्रुतविलम्बितम्	
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		Establishing himself by and by there in <span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls32">Marakata</a></span>,<br />
		a magnificent metropolis adorning Mother Earth,<br />
		the King governed the whole land,<br />
		challenged by none,<br />
		bringing peace to his subjects. 
		<span class="ncol">1</span>		
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c5_p2" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">	
		नरपतेः प्रतिहारमहीं मुहु-<br />
		र्विजयदन्तिमदोदकपङ्किलाम् ।<br />
		क्षितिभुजां भुजभूषणघट्टन-<br />
		प्रसृमरो मणिरेणुरशोषयत् ॥ २ ॥
	</p>
	<p>
		<audio controls="controls">
		  <source src="audio/5_2.m4a" type="audio/mpeg" />
		  Your browser does not support the audio tag.
		</audio> 
	</p>	
	<p class="enpoem">
		At the threshold to the Prince’s palace,<br />
		the jewelled dust billowing forth<br />
		every day<br />
		as kings jostled,<br />
		bracelet brushing against bracelet,<br />
		dried up the slush created by the springs of ichor<br />
		streaming from war elephants. 
		<span class="ncol">2</span>		
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c5_p3" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">	
		अथ सुगन्धिहिमान् व्यजनानिलान्<br />
		मृगदृशः कृतचन्दनचर्चिकाः ।<br />
		शशिमतीश्च निशाः प्रियतां नय-<br />
		न्नरपतेरुदभूदृतुरूष्मलः ॥ ३ ॥
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		It was then that Grīṣma came,<br />
		leading the King to revel in<br />
		breaths of air chill and fragrant from fans,<br />
		doe-eyed women smeared with sandalwood,<br />
		nights aglint with the moon.		
		<span class="ncol">3</span>		
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c5_p4" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">	
		नियतिनिर्मितदक्षिणदिग्वधू-<br />
		विरहतापनिवारणवाञ्छ‍या ।<br />
		अहिमभानुरहन्यहनि ध्रुवं<br />
		हरितमाप हिमाचलशीतलाम् ॥ ४ ॥	
	</p>
	<p>
		<audio controls="controls">
		  <source src="audio/5_4.m4a" type="audio/mpeg" />
		  Your browser does not support the audio tag.
		</audio> 
	</p>	
	<p class="enpoem">
		Forcibly parted from his sweetheart the South<br />
		by destiny’s decree,<br />
		and longing to allay his love-burn,<br />
		as it were,<br />
		day after day<br /> 
		the hot-rayed sun<br />
		steered a steady course<br />
		for the Himālaya-cooled North.<span class="ref"><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c5_en1">1</a></sup></span>
		<span class="ncol">4</span>		
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c5_p5" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		सरसचन्दनधारिषु मौक्तिक-<br />
		त्रिसरनिर्झरहारिषु सुभ्रुवाम् ।<br />
		कुचतटेषु निदाघनिपीडितो<br />
		धृतिमगात् कुसुमायुधकुञ्जरः ।। ५ ॥			
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		The formidable elephant that was the flower-arrowed Kāma,<br />
		scorched by the summer heat<br />
		found relief upon the slopes of beautiful women’s breasts,<br />
		home to refreshing sandal<br />
		and entrancing rivulets<br />
		trickling down in pearl-string triplets.
		<span class="ncol">5</span>		
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c5_p6" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">	
		सलिलकेलिकुतूहलकुन्तली-<br />
		कुचतटाहतिजातभयैरिव ।<br />
		अपसृतैरजनि प्रतिवासरं<br />
		नृपतिगेहविहारसरोजलैः ॥ ६ ॥
	</p>
	<p>
		<audio controls="controls">
		  <source src="audio/5_6.m4a" type="audio/mpeg" />
		  Your browser does not support the audio tag.
		</audio> 
	</p>	
	<p class="enpoem">
		Every day<br />
		the waters of the palaces’ lakes<br />
		shrank a little further away<br />
		beaten into terror by the sloping breasts<br />
		of the ladies of that land<br />
		larking about lithely as they bathed.
		<span class="ncol">6</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c5_p7" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">	
		अथ दलन्निचुलद्रुममञ्जरी-<br />
		निचयदर्शितचामरविभ्रमः ।<br />
		कृतनुतिः किल चातकयाचकै-<br />
		र्नृपतिमन्वगमज्जलदागमः ॥ ७ ॥	
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		Then came the coming of the rains,<br />
		impersonating the King:<br />
		<span class="it"><span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls6">camara</a></span></span> 
		fly-whisks in the <span class="it"><span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls33">nicula</a></span></span> blossom<br />
		into clusters bursting;<br />
		suppliants in the <span class="it"><span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls10">cātaka</a></span></span> birds,<br />
		words of praise ever singing.<span class="ref"><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c5_en2">2</a></sup></span>
		<span class="ncol">7</span>		
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c5_p8" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">	
		स्फुटतटित्तपनीयगुणोज्ज्वलैः<br />
		पृथुपयःकणमौक्तिकसङ्गिभिः ।<br />
		अलिकदम्बकसच्छविभिर्दिशा-<br />
		मसितकञ्चुलिकायितमम्बुदैः ॥ ८ ॥	
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		The directions wore a dark blouse<br />
		made of bee-black clouds<br />
		aglitter with a golden lacework of lightning,<br />
		and studded with pearls formed of rounded rain drops.		
		<span class="ncol">8</span>		
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c5_p9" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">	
		हरितलोहितपाण्डुरराजत<br />
		त्रिदशराजशरासनलेखिका ।<br />
		मरकतोपलविद्रुममौक्तिकै-<br />
		र्विरचिता रशनेव नभःश्रियः ॥ ९ ॥	
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		A sleek streak of rainbow<br />
		gleaming green, red and white<br />
		seemed to be the sky’s girdle-string,<br />
		embroidered with emerald, coral and pearl.		
		<span class="ncol">9</span>		
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c5_p10" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">	
		रुधिरबिन्दुनिभच्छविरन्वगात्<br />
		क्षितितले हरिगोपपरम्परा ।<br />
		घनघरट्टपरस्परघट्टन-<br />
		क्षरदिरम्मदवह्निकणावलिम् ॥ १० ॥	
	</p>
	<p>
		<audio controls="controls">
		  <source src="audio/5_10.m4a" type="audio/mpeg" />
		  Your browser does not support the audio tag.
		</audio> 
	</p>	
	<p class="enpoem">
		Innumerable <span class="it"><span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls16">indragopas</a></span></span>,<br />
		bright red as pricks of blood,<br /> 
		seemed to be<br />
		a shower of lightning sparks pouring down to earth<br />
		as cloud ground against stone cloud.		
		<span class="ncol">10</span>		
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c5_p11" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">	
		पटुपुरःपवनाधिगतभ्रमा<br />
		जलमुचः करकोपलकैतवात् ।<br />
		सलिलराशिपयःसहचूषिता-<br />
		मुदवमन्निव मौक्तिकसंहतिम् ॥ ११ ॥	
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		Wheeling in the wild head-winds,<br /> 
		clouds seemed to spew out,<br />
		disguised as dazzling hailstones,<br />
		a mouthful of pearls<br />
		sucked up when they swallowed the sea’s salt water.		
		<span class="ncol">11</span>		
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c5_p12" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">	
		करतलैरिव गन्धवहैर्घनाः<br />
		प्रहितकैतकपांसुविभूतयः ।<br />
		स्तनितहुङ्कृतिभिर्निरकासय-<br />
		न्नृपतियौवतमानमहाग्रहम् ॥ १२ ॥	
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		Flinging the sacred ash of <span class="it"><span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls25">ketakī</a></span></span> pollen<br />
		from gusts of wind running together to form upraised palms,<br />
		and roaring ‘hum’ with each thunderclap<span class="ref"><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c5_en3">3</a></sup></span>,<br />
		the clouds exorcised the spirit of spite<br />
		possessing the King’s young wives.
		<span class="ncol">12</span>		
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c5_p13" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">	
		तदनु पद्मवनीपरिहासक-<br />
		स्त्रिदशनाथशरासनतस्करः ।<br />
		भुजगभुङ्मुखमुद्रणभौरिकः<br />
		समुदभूत् समयो जलदात्ययः ॥ १३ ॥	
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		After that arrived Śarad –<br />
		clown to clusters of lotuses,<br /> 
		robber of rainbows,<br />
		treasurer sealing tight the talkative tongues of peacocks<span class="ref"><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c5_en4">4</a></sup></span>.
		<span class="ncol">13</span>		
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c5_p14" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">	
		विधुतकाशसटाभरभासुरः<br />
		प्रकटितोरुजपारुणलोचनः ।<br />
		व्यघटयद् घनदन्तिघटाः स्फुर-<br />
		द्रविमुखः शरदागमकेसरी ॥ १४ ॥	
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		Arriving as a lion –<br />
		splendid as he shakes out his full mane of <span class="it"><span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls24">kāśa</a></span></span> grass,<br />
		bloodshot eyes in <span class="it"><span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls17">japā</a></span></span> flowers,<br />
		his face the effulgent sun –<br />
		Śarad sundered the squadrons of elephant-shaped clouds.		
		<span class="ncol">14</span>		
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c5_p15" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">	
		जलदकालकलिस्फुरितां शनैः<br />
		कलुषतां प्रशमय्य कृशाः पुनः ।<br />
		घटयति स्म शरत् तटिनीसखी-<br />
		रुपनतैः कलहंसविलासिभिः ॥ १५ ॥	
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		Soothing bit by bit their turmoil<br />
		stirred up by the raging row of the monsoon,<br />
		Śarad re-united her friends the rivers<br />
		grown gaunt<br />
		with their lovers the <span class="it"><span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls15">haṃsas</a></span></span><br />
		newly returned.
		<span class="ncol">15</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c5_p16" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">	
		विकचपद्मविलोचनमात्मनो<br />
		मुखमवेक्षितुमात्तकुतूहला ।<br />
		नियतमभ्रनिचोलकगर्भतः<br />
		शरदकर्षदहर्पतिदर्पणम् ॥ १६ ॥	
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		Śarad drew her mirror,<br />
		the iridescent sun,<br />
		out of a clutch made of clouds,<br />
		clearly eager to admire herself<br />
		as the lotuses of her eyes burst into bloom.		
		<span class="ncol">16</span>		
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c5_p17" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">	
		वनभुवः परितः पवनेरितै-<br />
		र्नवजपाकुसुमैः कृतदीपिकाः ।<br />
		प्रथममेव नृपस्य निदेशतो<br />
		विजयिनस्तुरगान् निरराजयन् ॥ १७ ॥	
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		Before the King had even given the order,<br />
		the forest groves all around,<br />
		scribing circles with oil lamps<br />
		in the fresh <span class="it"><span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls17">japā</a></span></span> flowers fluttered about by the wind,<br />
		performed an arati ceremony<span class="ref"><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c5_en5">5</a></sup></span><br />
		for his ever-victorious horses.		
		<span class="ncol">17</span>		
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c5_p18" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">	
		अथ नृपस्य समुत्सुकचेतसो<br />
		मदनकेलिकलासु विलासिनः ।<br />
		प्रियमिवाचरितुं समुपागमत्<br />
		प्रगुणयन् क्षणदास्तुहिनागमः ॥ १८ ॥	
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		Next in order came Hemanta,<br />
		lengthening the nights<br />
		as if to please the passion-fired King<br />
		who longed for lovemaking.		
		<span class="ncol">18</span>		
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c5_p19" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">	
		हिमभरैर्विहतः कमलाकरो<br />
		मृदितकान्तिरभून्मृगलाञ्छनः ।<br />
		वदनमेव नरेन्द्रनतभ्रुवा-<br />
		मभजत श्रियमप्रतिशासनाम् ॥ १९ ॥
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		The lotus pond was blasted by thick frost.<br />
		The moon was robbed of its magnificence.<br />
		The faces of the King’s beloveds<br />
		of bow-curved brows<br />
		alone suffered no threat to their beauty.		
		<span class="ncol">19</span>		
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c5_p20" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">	
		विकचकुन्दकलापपरिष्क्रिया-<br />
		विरचितालकजालकविभ्रमम् ।<br />
		असमयेऽपि समौक्तिकमण्डनं<br />
		प्रभुरमंस्त निजं प्रमदाजनम् ॥ २० ॥	
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		The Lord thought his ladies,<br />
		their furled curls prettily decorated<br />
		with bunches of budding <span class="it"><span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls29">kunda</a></span></span> blooms,<br />
		were wearing pearls<br />
		in spite of the season.		
		<span class="ncol">20</span>		
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c5_p21" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">	
		इति सुखान्युचितानि हिमागमे<br />
		समनुभूय मनोभवसन्निभः ।<br />
		शिशिरयामवतीष्वपि रागवान्<br />
		रमयितुं रमणीरुदयुङ्क्त सः ॥ २१ ॥	
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		Thus the King,<br />
		Love himself in human form,<br />
		had his fill of Hemanta’s delights.<br />
		Lust-lit,<br />
		he led his lovers to lovemaking<br />
		on Śiśira nights too.
		<span class="ncol">21</span>		
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c5_p22" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">	
		अपदिशञ्छिशिरानिलमङ्गकैः<br />
		पुलकितैर्नृपतेः सविधं गतः ।<br />
		मदनसम्भृतघर्मपयःकणै-<br />
		र्भृशमलज्जत मुग्धवधूजनः ॥ २२ ॥	
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		As they came to him,<br />
		his young wives tried to blame their goosebumped limbs<br />
		on the breeze blowing cold.<br />
		They blushed furiously<br />
		when trickles of sweat revealed their arousal.		
		<span class="ncol">22</span>		
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c5_p23" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">	
		उपहरन् कुसुमानि महीरुहां<br />
		किसलयैः कलिताञ्जलिबन्धनः ।<br />
		मधुरकोकिलकूजितभाषितो<br />
		मधुरथैनमुपासितुमासदत् ॥ २३ ॥	
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		Offering him flowers from the trees,<br />
		raising his hands in a <span class="it">namaskāra</span><br />
		formed of fresh leaves still furled,<br />
		the honey-sweet singing of koels serving as hymns of praise –<br />
		the honeyed season of Vasanta then waited upon the King.		
		<span class="ncol">23</span>		
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c5_p24" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">	
		उपवनेष्वगमन्नुपमेयतां<br />
		स्फुटरुचो नवकिंशुककुट्मलाः ।<br />
		मथितपान्थमृगक्षतजारुणै-<br />
		र्मदनकेसरिणः कुटिलैर्नखैः ॥ २४ ॥	
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		In gardens and groves<br />
		the just blooming buds of the <span class="it"><span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls26">kiṃśuka</a></span></span><br />
		dazzlingly bright<br />
		looked like the curved claws of Kāma the lion,<br />
		red with the blood of his traveller prey<br />
		freshly slayed.<span class="ref"><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c5_en6">6</a></sup></span>		
		<span class="ncol">24</span>		
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c5_p25" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		चटुलषट्पदकज्जलपातिनी<br />
		विरुरुचे नवचम्पकमञ्जरी ।<br />
		प्रकटितेव हिमापगमश्रिया<br />
		स्मरमहोत्सवदीपपरम्परा ॥ २५ ॥
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		A row of fresh <span class="it"><span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls9">campaka</a></span></span> flowers,<br />
		shedding soot in the skittery bees,<br />
		seemed to be a line of oil lamps<br />
		lit by the lady of Vasanta<br />
		to celebrate the grand festival of Kāma.		
		<span class="ncol">25</span>		
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c5_p26" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">	
		सुतनवः फलकेषु मधूत्सवे<br />
		रतिपतिं परिलेखितुमुद्यताः ।<br />
		हृदयगोचरतामनिशं गतं<br />
		हरिहरात्मजमेव<span class="ref"><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c5_en7">7</a></sup></span> समालिखन् ॥ २६ ॥	
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		In the festival of Vasanta,<br />
		his pretty wives attempted to paint Rati’s prince<br />
		upon their picture boards,<br />
		but found themselves drawing the King<br />
		for it was he who dwelt eternally in their hearts.		
		<span class="ncol">26</span>		
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c5_p27" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">	
		क्षितिपतिं किल कुङ्कुममुष्टिना<br />
		समभिताडयितुं धियमादधौ ।<br />
		सपदि घर्मपयःप्रसरेण तं<br />
		विगलितं न विवेद वधूजनः ॥ २७ ॥	
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		Making up their minds<br />
		to fling fistfuls of fine <span class="it"><span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls28">kuṅkuma</a></span></span><br /> 
		at their lord,<br />
		his darlings did not discern that<br />
		the powder had become a trickle of liquid<br />
		the second it met their sweat-wetted hands.	
		<span class="ncol">27</span>		
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c5_p28" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">	
		इति समुपचिताभिश्चातुरीभिर्विशेषा-<br />
		नृतुषु समुपलभ्यान्निर्विशन्निर्विशङ्कम् ।<br />
		सुतनुभिरवियोगोत्कण्ठिताभिस्तृतीयं<br />
		व्यतनुत पुरुषार्थं कम्पराजः कृतार्थम् ॥ २८ ॥ मालिनी	
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		Thus with an ease born of practice<br />
		King Kampa enjoyed the specialities<br />
		on offer in each season,<br />
		ever revelling carefree<br />
		in the company of his handsome wives<br />
		who knew not the painful longing of separation.<br />
		In doing so he lent significance<br />
		to the pursuit of pleasure,<br />
		the third goal of human existence.		
		<span class="ncol">28</span>		
	</p>
</div>

	[^1]: The sun travels south for half of the year and north for the other half.
	[^2]: The association, seen throughout this canto, of certain flora and fauna with each season follows poetic convention.
	[^3]: These three actions imitate elements of an exorcism ceremony.
	[^4]: After dancing and singing all monsoon, peacocks fall silent in Śarad.
	[^5]: in which lamps are swung in clockwise circles in front of the deity
	[^6]: Separated from their lovers, travellers suffer keenly the effects of Kāma in Vasanta.
	[^7]: For a discussion of the term '<span class="it">hariharātmaja</span>' please see the textual notes on the website.
</div>
</body>
</html>
