<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en"
xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
   <title>Madhurā Vijayam</title>
   <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/mv.css" />
</head>
<body>
<div class="page">

<div id="c9_p1" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
मुक्ताफलैर्वीरकृपाणलेखा-<br />
विभिन्नगन्धद्विपकुम्भमुक्तैः ।<br />
रक्तारुणैस्तत्क्षणघट्टनोत्थ-<br />
स्फुलिङ्गसङ्घातमतिर्वितेने ।। १ ॥ उपजातिः
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
The blood-stained pearls flooding forth<br />
as warriors sliced open rutting elephants’ temples<br />
with sharp swords<br />
seemed to be a shower of sparks<br />
as iron struck bone.
<span class="ncol">1</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c9_p2" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
निशाचराः केचन कुञ्जराणां<br />
कुम्भस्थलान्निःसृतमास्रपूरम् ।<br />
निष्ठ्यूतमुक्तामणयः सहर्षं<br />
चुचूषुरुत्पुष्करनालदण्डैः ॥ २ ॥
</p>
<p>
<audio controls="controls">
  <source src="audio/9_2.m4a" type="audio/mpeg" />
  Your browser does not support the audio tag.
</audio> 
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
A rabble of night-roaming *rākṣasas*,<br />
inverting elephant trunks to make straws,<br />
slurped with satisfied burps<br />
the blood streaming from the beasts’ temples,<br />
spitting out the pearls.
<span class="ncol">2</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c9_p3" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
जिघत्सयान्तः पतगैः प्रविष्टैः<br />
प्रस्पन्दमानं कुणपं द्विपस्य ।<br />
समीपमासाद्य सजीवबुद्ध्या<br />
व्यसुं सतृष्णोऽपि जहौ सृगालः ॥ ३ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
A jackal came up to the corpse of an elephant,<br />
but bolted,<br />
though it was dead and he was ravenous –<br />
for the birds that had entered it searching for spoils<br />
were setting it ashudder<br />
as if with new life.
<span class="ncol">3</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c9_p4" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
द्विषा सरोषेण पृषत्कवर्षै-<br />
र्निषूदितः कोऽप्यमरत्वमेत्य ।<br />
चकार तस्योपरि पुष्पवर्षं<br />
सहर्षमुद्घोषितचाटुवादः ॥ ४ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
One man –<br />
slain by an enemy soldier<br />
showering arrows upon him in seething anger –<br />
now become immortal,<br />
showered flowers upon his assassin<br />
singing his praises ecstatically.
<span class="ncol">4</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c9_p5" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
कुम्भेषु भिन्दन् नृपतिर्द्विपेन्द्रान् <br />
मुक्ताफलैः शर्करिलान्तराभिः ।<br />
प्रावर्तयद्रक्ततरङ्गिणीभिः<br />
परःशताः संयति ताम्रपर्णीः ॥ ५ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
The King,<br />
tearing apart the temples of the mightiest of elephants,<br />
made hundreds of Tāmraparṇī rivers flow<br />
all over the battlefield<br />
as streams of blood gushed forth<br />
pebbled with pearls.
<span class="ncol">5</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c9_p6" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
तेन द्विपास्तोमरिणा विभिन्नाः<br />
कुम्भस्थलैरुज्झितमौक्तिकौघैः ।<br />
क्रौञ्चस्य जह्रुर्गुहशक्तिघात-<br />
प्रकीर्णहंसप्रकरस्य शोभाम् ॥ ६ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
As his javelin rent each elephant’s temples,<br />
letting loose a flood of pearls,<br />
the beasts came to resemble Mount Krauñca<br />
when Kumāra’s spear pierced it clean through<br />
setting forth a stream of *haṃsas*.<span class="ref"><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c9_en1">1</a></sup></span>
<span class="ncol">6</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c9_p7" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
शूरस्तथा प्राहृत मुद्गरेण<br />
शिरस्त्रवन्ति द्विषतां शिरांसि ।<br />
यथा विनिर्यन्नयनानि तानि<br />
मङ्क्षु न्यमाङ्क्षुः स्वशरीर एव ॥ ७ ॥
</p>
<p>
<audio controls="controls">
  <source src="audio/9_7.m4a" type="audio/mpeg" />
  Your browser does not support the audio tag.
</audio> 
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
With such force did the warrior<br />
hurl his hammer upon the helmets of his foes<br />
that their heads,<br />
eyes bulging out,<br />
sunk with a plunk into their necks.
<span class="ncol">7</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c9_p8" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
ततस्तुलुष्कान् युधि कान्दिशीका-<br />
नालोक्य विष्फारितघोरशार्ङ्गः ।<br />
कम्पक्षितीन्द्रं यवनाधिराजः<br />
प्रत्यग्रहीद्वृत्र इवामरेन्द्रम् ॥ ८ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
At that moment,<br />
seeing his men running helter-skelter across the battlefield,<br />
the Yavana king,<br />
twanging his fearsome bow,<br />
attacked King Kampa<br />
as Vṛtra did Indra, king of the gods.
<span class="ncol">8</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c9_p9" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
आस्फाल्यमानस्य च तेन गाढं<br />
शार्ङ्गस्य मौर्वीनिनदश्चकार ।<br />
चिरात् परित्यज्य तमुच्चलन्त्या<br />
जयश्रियो नूपुरघोषशङ्काम् ॥ ९ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
The sound from the Sultan’s bowstring<br />
as he twanged it forcefully<br />
seemed to be the sudden trill of anklets<br />
as his goddess of victory<br />
after so many years<br />
started from his side,<br /> 
abandoning him.
<span class="ncol">9</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c9_p10" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
बाणा निरस्ता यवनेन तस्मि-<br />
न्नपाङ्गपाता इव वीरलक्ष्म्याः ।<br />
कम्पेश्वरेणाप्यभिपारसीकं<br />
शराः कटाक्षा इव कालरात्रेः ॥ १० ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
The Yavana lord’s arrows accosted the King<br />
like the come-hither glances of Victory herself;<br />
but those fired by Kampa assailed the Persian<br />
like the menacing leer of dusky Death.
<span class="ncol">10</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c9_p11" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
स केरलप्राणमरुद्भुजङ्गान्<br />
वन्यावनीन्द्रद्रुमदाववह्नीन् ।<br />
अन्ध्रान्धकारक्षयतिग्मभासो<br />
बाणानमुञ्चद्यवने नरेन्द्रः ।। ११ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
Arrows that had served as<br />
snakes to the vital air of the Kerala king,<br />
wildfires to the flourishing tree<br /> 
that was the forest chief, Campa,<br />
suns destroying the grand dragoons of darkness,<br /> 
the Andhras –<br />
such arrows did the King let loose upon the Sultan.
<span class="ncol">11</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c9_p12" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
क्षतानि यान्यस्य शरैः शरीरे<br />
चकार वीरस्य तुलुष्कवीरः ।<br />
वितेनिरे तानि नखाङ्कशङ्कां<br />
जयश्रियो भोगसमुत्सुकायाः ॥ १२ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
The wounds wrought<br />
by the Tuluṣka warrior’s arrows<br />
upon that warrior’s limbs<br />
made it seem as though<br />
the goddess of victory<br />
ardently awaiting their lovemaking<br />
had pricked him with her sharp-tipped nails.
<span class="ncol">12</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c9_p13" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
उदग्रमग्रे यवनाधिभर्तुः<br />
साक्षात् कलेर्मौलिमिवाशुगेन ।<br />
स मङ्क्षु सार्धं जयकाङ्क्षितेन<br />
ध्वाङ्क्षध्वजं ध्वंसयति स्म धन्वी ॥ १३ ॥
</p>
<p>
<audio controls="controls">
  <source src="audio/9_13.m4a" type="audio/mpeg" />
  Your browser does not support the audio tag.
</audio> 
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
In a split second<br />
with a single shaft<br />
did the bowman break the crow-blazoned banner<br />
flying high before the Yavana emperor<br />
as though it were the very head of Kali –<br />
and with it all his hopes of victory.
<span class="ncol">13</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c9_p14" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
अमर्षितस्याथ पृषत्कवर्षं<br />
विमुञ्चतो विद्विषतः शरेण ।<br />
स कार्मुकज्यामलुनात् तुलुष्क-<br />
राज्यश्रियो मङ्गलसूत्रकल्पाम् ॥ १४ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
As his rival rained arrows upon him<br />
in feverish fury,<br />
the King severed with his own arrow<br />
the Turk’s bow string,<br />
as though it were the sacred marital chord<br />
worn by the goddess of his reign.<span class="ref"><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c9_en2">2</a></sup></span>
<span class="ncol">14</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c9_p15" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
विहाय शार्ङ्गं धनुरिद्धरोष-<br />
स्तुलुष्कवीरस्तरवारिमुग्रम् ।<br />
तुरङ्गपर्याणनिबद्धवर्ध्रा-<br />
विलम्बिनं सत्वरमुज्जहार ॥ १५ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
The stouthearted Sultan,<br />
incandescent with ire,<br />
flung aside his horn-carved bow<br />
and at once seized a fearsome sword<br />
hanging by a strap from his saddle.
<span class="ncol">15</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c9_p16" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
अथाग्रहीत् कम्पनृपस्तमेव<br />
कौक्षेयकं कालकरालरूपम् ।<br />
व्यापादनार्थं यवनेश्वरस्य<br />
यः प्रेषितः प्राक् कलशोद्भवेन ॥ १६ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
King Kampa in turn took hold of that sword<br />
sent to him afore by Agastya<br />
to vanquish the Yavana king,<br />
a blade dreadful as the dark lord of death.
<span class="ncol">16</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c9_p17" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
स वञ्चयंस्तत्तरवारिधारां<br />
धाराविशेषप्रवणोपवाह्यः ।<br />
अशातयत् तस्य शिरो निमेषा-<br />
दनेन कर्णाटकुलप्रदीपः ॥ १७ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
The light of the Karṇāṭas, Kampa,<br />
riding his horse at a great gallop,<br />
lopped off the Sultan’s head with his sword,<br />
dodging his foe’s whetted blade.
<span class="ncol">17</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c9_p18" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
अज्ञातसेवोचितचाटुवादं<br />
तुलुष्कसाम्राज्यकृताभिषेकम् ।<br />
दिवौकसामप्यकृतप्रणामं<br />
भूमौ सुरत्राणशिरः पपात ॥ १८ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
Never had the Sultan's head sunk to sycophancy.<br />
Gracing the imperial crown of the Tuluṣka Empire,<br />
not once had it bowed, even before the gods.<br />
Down<br />
to the ground<br />
it fell.
<span class="ncol">18</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c9_p19" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
च्युतेऽपि शीर्षे चलिताश्ववल्गा-<br />
नियन्त्रणव्यापृतवामपाणिम् ।<br />
प्रतिप्रहारप्रसृतान्यहस्तं<br />
वीरः कबन्धं द्विषतोऽभ्यनन्दीत् ॥ १९ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
The courageous king cheered his rival:<br />
though the corpse’s head was rolling in the dust,<br />
the left hand continued to restrain his speeding steed,<br />
while the right stretched forth to settle the score.
<span class="ncol">19</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c9_p20" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
प्रशान्तदावेव वनान्तलक्ष्मी-<br />
र्गतोपरागा गगनस्थलीव ।<br />
कलिन्दजा मर्दितकालियेव<br />
दिग्दक्षिणासीत् क्षतपारसीका ॥ २० ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
Like a beautiful grove after a wildfire has finally tired,<br />
like the expanse of the sky when an eclipse has passed,<br />
like Yamunā, Kalinda’s daughter, once Kāliya was killed<span class="ref"><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c9_en3">3</a></sup></span> –<br />
thus shone the South now that the Persian lay slain.
<span class="ncol">20</span>
</p>
</div>

[^1]: The god Kumāra blasted a hole through this Himalayan mountain, thus creating a shortcut for *haṃsas* flying to Mount Kailāsa.
[^2]: A woman’s marital chord (the mangalsutra) is strongly linked to her husband’s life.
[^3]: Kṛṣṇa killed the serpent Kāliya which lived in the Yamunā river.

</div>
</body>
</html>
