<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en"
xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
   <title>Madhurā Vijayam</title>
   <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/mv.css" />
</head>
<body>
<div class="page">

<div id="c3_p1" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
ततो यथावत्कृतचौलसंस्क्रियो<br />
नरेन्द्रसूनुः स्वत एव लब्धवान् ।<br />
कलासु शश्वत् सकलासु कौशलं<br />
गुरूपदेशस्त्वपदेशतामगात् ॥ १ ॥ वंशस्थम्
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
In due course,<br />
once he had undergone<br />
the *caula* ceremony<br />
as he ought,<br />
His Majesty Kampa fast mastered all major disciplines –<br />
schooled by a *guru*,<br />
though he had no need for schooling.
<span class="ncol">1</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c3_p2" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
स पञ्चबाणद्विपकेलिदीर्घिकां<br />
धरानुरागद्रुमपुष्पमञ्जरीम् ।<br />
नितम्बिनीनेत्रचकोरचन्द्रिका-<br />
मवापदास्कन्दितशैशवां दशाम् ॥ २ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
Youth suddenly succeeded childhood.<br />
And his youth was<br />
the lake where Kāma, as elephant, wallows;<br />
the blossom upon the tree<br />
that was the nation’s adoration;<br />
the moonlight cherished by the *cakora*-like eyes<br />
of heavy-hipped ladies.
<span class="ncol">2</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c3_p3" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
स रूपगर्वेण निरास्थदङ्घ्रिणा<br />
स्मरस्य नूनं जयवैजयन्तिकाम् ।<br />
न चेत् कथं तस्य तलेऽतिकोमले<br />
सुलेखमालक्ष्यत मीनलाञ्छनम् ॥ ३ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
Glorying in his beauty,<br />
he must have trampled<br />
upon Kāma’s triumphal banner.<br />
Why else did the perfectly formed lines<br />
upon his soles so soft<br />
assume the shape of a fish?<span class="ref"><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c3_en1">1</a></sup></span>
<span class="ncol">3</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c3_p4" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
अधारयद्दर्शितदेहसौष्ठवां<br />
स राजसूनुस्तनुवृत्तमध्यताम् ।<br />
पराक्रमत्रासितचित्तवृत्तिभि-<br />
र्मृगाधिराजैरुपदीकृतामिव ॥ ४ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
The slender circumference of his waist –<br />
setting off his stately physique –<br />
seemed to be a peace offering<br />
made by lions,<br />
kings of the jungle,<br />
their hearts trembling at the thought of his might.
<span class="ncol">4</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c3_p5" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
विहाय मध्यं यदि लक्ष्मरेखया<br />
बहिः प्रसार्येत सुधांशुमण्डलम् ।<br />
दरोदितश्मश्रुकृतश्रियस्तदा<br />
तदाननेन्दोरुपमानतां व्रजेत् ॥ ५ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
If its black mark were to slide down<br />
from the centre to the edge,<br />
then the moon might come close<br />
to resembling his moon-like face<br />
made still more endearing<br />
by the beard just appearing.
<span class="ncol">5</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c3_p6" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
अधारयद्गर्भितरक्तसन्ध्यकं<br />
नृपात्मजः केशकलापमायतम् ।<br />
दृढानुरागच्छुरितैर्मृगीदृशा-<br />
मनुप्रविष्टं हृदयैरिवान्तरा ॥ ६ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
The Prince had a majestic mane of hair<br />
interlaced with *raktasandhyaka* flowers –<br /> 
as if entwined within it<br />
were the hearts of doe-eyed ladies,<br />
daubed with the passion he aroused.
<span class="ncol">6</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c3_p7" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
अथैनमासादितयौवनोदयं<br />
नरेन्द्रकन्याभिरयोजयन्नृपः ।<br />
घनागमः सम्भृतरत्नसम्पदं<br />
वरापगाभिर्निधिमम्भसामिव ॥ ७ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
At length<br />
the Sovereign wedded his son,<br />
blooming with the blush of youth,<br />
to royal maidens –<br />
just as the coming of the clouds weds the ocean,<br />
resplendent with a wealth of jewels and gems,<br />
to great rivers.
<span class="ncol">7</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c3_p8" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
अरातिवर्गोन्मथनेन विश्रुतं<br />
विधातुमत्यन्तविनीतमप्यमुम् ।<br />
कदाचिदर्थोल्लसितेन भूपतिः<br />
स वाङ्मयेनैवमुपादिशत् सुतम् ॥ ८ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
The King wished his son<br />
to win fame by worsting all his enemies,<br />
and to perfect his self-mastery.<br />
One day he counselled him thus<br />
with words rich in wisdom.
<span class="ncol">8</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c3_p9" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
धियः प्रकाशादुपदेशसम्भृतात्<br />
तमो हि तारुण्यविजृम्भितं जनाः ।<br />
समुज्झितुं तात भवन्ति पारिता-<br />
स्तदेतदाकर्णयितुं त्वमर्हसि ॥ ९ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
‘My son,<br />
it is by the light of knowledge<br />
fuelled by friendly advice<br />
that people have the power to dissipate<br />
that blinding darkness of budding youth.<br />
You would do well to heed<br />
these words of mine.
<span class="ncol">9</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c3_p10" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
मुहुःप्रसर्पन्मदमीलितेक्षणाः<br />
क्षणाधिरोहद्रजसो मलीमसाः ।<br />
गजा इव स्तम्भनिरुद्धचेतसः<br />
खला न गृह्णन्ति नियन्तृचोदितम् ॥ १० ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
‘The dissolute are like rutting elephants.<br />
Both are blind,<br />
one with a pompous pride,<br />
the other with streams of rut that form a river.<br />
Forever in thrall to *rajas*<span class="ref"><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c3_en2">2</a></sup></span>,<br />
the men are as depraved<br />
as the mud-splattered beasts are filthy.<br />
A mind deadened by overindulgence<br />
frustrates the libertine;<br />
a taming post the elephant.<br />
Neither gives ear to their master.
<span class="ncol">10</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c3_p11" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
सहस्रशस्तुङ्गतुरङ्गवीचयो<br />
मदद्विपद्वीपविशेषितान्तराः ।<br />
भवन्तमुग्रायुधनक्रराजयो<br />
भजन्ति नित्यं बहला बलाब्धयः ॥ ११ ॥
</p>
<p>
<audio controls="controls">
  <source src="audio/3_11.m4a" type="audio/mpeg" />
  Your browser does not support the audio tag.
</audio> 
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
‘Battalions vast as bottomless oceans –<br /> 
high-stepping horses as white-cresting waves,<br />
rutting elephants as abutting islands towering high,<br />
rows of savage weapons for floats of predatory crocodiles –<br />
stand in bands of thousands<br />
ever at the ready for you.
<span class="ncol">11</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c3_p12" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
उपेत्य तुण्डीरमखण्डितोद्यमः<br />
प्रमथ्य चम्पप्रमुखान् रणोन्मुखान् ।<br />
प्रशाधि काञ्चीमनुवर्तितप्रजः<br />
पतिर्निधीनामलकापुरीमिव ॥ १२ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
‘Approach the Tuṇḍīra land<br />
and finish for once and for all those warriors headed by Campa<br />
hurling themselves headfirst into battle.<br />
Rule Kāñcī wisely and win the love of her inhabitants –<br />
just as Kubera, lord of wealth, rules Alakā.
<span class="ncol">12</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c3_p13" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
अथाभिभूताखिलवन्यभूभृत-<br />
स्तुरुष्कभङ्गस्तव नैव दुष्करः ।<br />
निगीर्णशाखाशतसंवृतिः कथं<br />
तरुप्रकाण्डं न दहेद्दवानलः ॥ १३ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
‘After laying waste every one of the woodland chieftains,<br />
you’ll crush the Sultan with ease.<br />
Once a fierce fire has devoured<br />
the countless small branches providing cover,<br />
how can it fail to burn down the tree itself?’
<span class="ncol">13</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c3_p14" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
इतीरयित्वा विरते नरेश्वरे<br />
प्रवृष्टपाथोधरसाम्यधारिणि ।<br />
कृतप्रणामः शिरसा प्रतीष्टवान्<br />
गुरूपदेशं गुणिनां पुरःसरः ॥ १४ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
As a cloud comes to a close after pouring forth its rain<br />
so did the King after delivering his speech.<br />
The Prince,<br />
foremost among the noble,<br />
prostrated before his father’s feet<br />
taking to heart his hallowed words.
<span class="ncol">14</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c3_p15" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
अथोरगाणामधिपस्य भाविनं<br />
भुवो भरस्यापगमं दिनेश्वरः ।<br />
निवेदयिष्यन्निव गाढरंहसा<br />
रथेन पातालगुहामगाहत ॥ १५ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
Then the sun –<br />
wishing as it were<br />
to tell Śeṣa, lord of serpents,<br />
that the load of the globe would soon be lightened<span class="ref"><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c3_en3">3</a></sup></span> –<br />
hurried in a flurry of flying chariot<br />
into the cavern of Pātāla.
<span class="ncol">15</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c3_p16" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
अथ नृपसुतः सान्ध्यं निर्माय कर्म सभां गतः<br />
क्षणमिव गुरोराज्ञां राज्ञां गणाय निवेद्य सः ।<br />
विमतविजयव्यग्रोत्साहान् विहाय गृहाय ता-<br />
नरमत सुखी शय्यागेहे सरोजमुखीसखः ॥ १६ ॥ हरिणी
</p>
<p>
<audio controls="controls">
  <source src="audio/3_16.m4a" type="audio/mpeg" />
  Your browser does not support the audio tag.
</audio> 
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
At length, after the prayers of the near-drawing evening,<br />
the Prince entered the assembly hall.<br />
In an instant he told the gathered leaders to heed<br />
his father’s orders.<br />
Raring to raze their rivals, he bid them head to bed,<br />
while he in his sleeping quarters<br />
relaxed with his wives so dear, full of cheer.
<span class="ncol">16</span>
</p>
</div>

[^1]: Kāma’s banner is emblazoned with a fish.  
Lines upon the soles of the feet in the form of a fish are 
one of the signs of a *cakravartī*, a supreme emperor.

[^2]: *Rajas* is physical dirt as well as being the *guṇa* or quality characterised by excessive passion.
[^3]: by the destruction of the oppressive Sultan
</div>
</body>
</html>
