<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en"
xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
   <title>Madhurā Vijayam</title>
   <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/mv.css" />
</head>
<body>
<div class="page">

<div id="c7_p1" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
अथ कम्पनरेन्द्रसुभ्रुवां<br />
मुखपद्मान्यनुहार्य पङ्कजैः ।<br />
अपराधभियेव भानुमा-<br />
नपरक्ष्माधरकन्दरामगात् ॥ १ ॥ वियोगिनी
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
At that point the sun,<br />
as if filled with terror<br />
at the crime he had committed<br />
in trying to make lotuses as radiant<br />
as the lotus-faces of the King’s wives,<br />
scurried to a cave<br />
buried deep in the setting mountain.
<span class="ncol">1</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c7_p2" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
परिचूषितदीप्तिरम्बुजैः<br />
पुनरूष्माणमिवाप्तुमौर्वतः ।<br />
रयवल्गितवाहनो रविः<br />
पयसां राशिमवाप पश्चिमम् ॥ २ ॥
</p>
<p>
<audio controls="controls">
  <source src="audio/7_2.m4a" type="audio/mpeg" />
  Your browser does not support the audio tag.
</audio> 
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
Sucked clean of energy by lotuses,<br />
swiftly sank the sun into the western sea,<br />
chariot reverberating as he raced downwards,<br />
seemingly to replenish his heat from the fire in the deep.<span class="ref"><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c7_en1">1</a></sup></span>
<span class="ncol">2</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c7_p3" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
तरणेररुणीकृताः करै-<br />
र्वरुणस्त्रैणकपोलभित्तयः ।<br />
मदलोहिनिकामुपावहन्<br />
मदिरास्वादनमन्तराप्यहो ॥ ३ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
The full cheeks of Varuṇa’s wives,<br />
reddened by the rays of the setting sun,<br />
took on the rosy flush of wine<br />
though they had not<br />
touched a drop.<span class="ref"><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c7_en2">2</a></sup></span>
<span class="ncol">3</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c7_p4" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
प्रथमां हरितं प्रभाकरो<br />
विरहय्यात्मनि तापमाप यम् ।<br />
अपरामुपगम्य तं जहौ<br />
हृदयं कः खलु वेत्ति रागिणाम् ॥ ४ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
The scorching torment the sun suffered<br />
in parting from his first lover, the East,<br />
vanished in the arms of the next, the West.<br />
Who can fathom the hearts of those red-hot with passion?
<span class="ncol">4</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c7_p5" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
प्रतिबिम्बपरम्पराम्बुधौ<br />
पवनोद्धूततरङ्गसङ्गिनी ।<br />
नभसोऽवतरिष्यतो रवे-<br />
र्मणिसोपानधियं व्यभावयत् ॥ ५ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
The sun’s reflection,<br />
repeated over and over<br />
upon the wave-scored surface of the wind-stirred sea,<br />
looked like a ruby staircase<br />
readied for him to descend from the heavens.
<span class="ncol">5</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c7_p6" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
उदधौ पतितस्य भास्वतः<br />
कतिभिश्चित् किरणैः खवर्तिभिः ।<br />
उदपाद्यत कालकुञ्जरो-<br />
द्दलिताहर्द्रुमशाखिकाभ्रमः ॥ ६ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
As the sun plunged into the ocean,<br />
the few sunbeams still suspended in the sky<br />
seemed to be the strewn branches<br />
torn from the tree of day<br />
by the tusker of Time.
<span class="ncol">6</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c7_p7" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
गतदीप्ति गभस्तिमालिनो<br />
विलुठद्वीचिषु बिम्बमम्बुधेः ।<br />
शफराः पलखण्डशङ्क‍या<br />
रसनाभिर्लिलिहुर्मुहुर्मुहुः ॥ ७ ॥
</p>
<p>
<audio controls="controls">
  <source src="audio/7_7.m4a" type="audio/mpeg" />
  Your browser does not support the audio tag.
</audio> 
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
As the ray-rich sun’s radiance-robbed disc<br />
wobbled from wave to wave,<br />
fish fancied it a piece of meat,<br />
licking at it with flicking tongues.
<span class="ncol">7</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c7_p8" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
घटमानदलाररीपुटं<br />
नलिनं मन्दिरमिन्दिरास्पदम् ।<br />
परिपालयति स्म निक्वणन्<br />
परितो यामिकवन्मधुव्रतः ॥ ८ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
Whistling all the while,<br />
the bee,<br />
like a sentry on night-watch,<br />
patrolled the lotus flower –<br />
the tower which was Lakṣmī’s bower<span class="ref"><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c7_en3">3</a></sup></span>–<br />
as each petal-door was pulled to.
<span class="ncol">8</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c7_p9" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
अधिपङ्कजकोशमादधे<br />
बहिरालीनमधुव्रतच्छलात् ।<br />
मधुसौरभरक्षणोत्सुका<br />
दिनलक्ष्मीरिव लक्ष्म जातुषम् ॥ ९ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
The day herself<br />
seemed to place upon the lotus bud –<br />
a casket in which she was anxious<br />
to keep both nectar and scent safe –<br />
a lac-dark seal in the bee clinging to its edge.
<span class="ncol">9</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c7_p10" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
दिनवेषमपास्य यामिनी-<br />
वपुषा कालनटस्य नृत्यतः ।<br />
ददृशे जगता पितृप्रसू-<br />
र्दिवि नेपथ्यपटीव पाटला ॥ १० ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
To those on earth<br />
the glow of the evening sky<br />
seemed to be the crimson curtain<br />
drawn during the dance of the actor Time,<br />
as he changed from playing day<br />
to assume the role of night.
<span class="ncol">10</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c7_p11" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
वियति व्यरुचन् पयोधराः<br />
स्फुटसन्ध्यापरिपाटलत्विषः ।<br />
अचिरावतरद्विभावरी-<br />
पदलाक्षापटलानुकारिणः ॥ ११ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
In the sky shone the clouds,<br />
dyed a deep red by the twilight,<br />
as if freshly stained<br />
by a procession of lac-pink footprints<br />
as the dark dame, night, descended.
<span class="ncol">11</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c7_p12" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
उदियाय ततो दिगङ्गना-<br />
श्रवणाकल्पतमालपल्लवः ।<br />
रजनीमुखपत्रलेखिका-<br />
रचनारङ्कुमदस्तमोऽङ्कुरः ॥ १२ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
Then arose a sliver of darkness –<br /> 
a *tamāla* leaf earring<br />
for the ladies of the directions;<br />
a decorative design<br />
in musk-drawn lines<br />
upon the face of the evening sky<span class="ref"><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c7_en4">4</a></sup></span>.
<span class="ncol">12</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c7_p13" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
नयनानि जनस्य तत्क्षणा-<br />
न्निरुणद्धि स्म निरन्तरं तमः ।<br />
रविदीपभृताभ्रकर्पर-<br />
च्युतकालाञ्जनपुञ्जमेचकम् ॥ १३ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
In a moment,<br />
solid darkness shrouded people’s sight –<br />
a darkened mass of blackened soot<br />
falling from the dome of the sky<br />
where it had collected<br />
as the lamp of the sun below it burnt.<span class="ref"><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c7_en5">5</a></sup></span>
<span class="ncol">13</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c7_p14" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
तदमंसत मांसलं तम-<br />
स्तनुतारागणबिन्दुजालकम् ।<br />
दिवसात्ययचण्डताण्डव-<br />
च्युतमीशस्य गजाजिनं जनाः ॥ १४ ॥
</p>
<p>
<audio controls="controls">
  <source src="audio/7_14.m4a" type="audio/mpeg" />
  Your browser does not support the audio tag.
</audio> 
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
People deemed the dense darkness,<br />
dotted with a legion of slender stars,<br />
to be the fresh-flayed elephant hide<br />
fallen from Śiva’s shoulders<br />
as round and round he went in his vehement *tāṇḍava*<br />
at day’s end.
<span class="ncol">14</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c7_p15" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
अवपत् किमु कालकर्षक-<br />
स्तिमिराम्भःकलुषे नभस्तले ।<br />
विमलामुडुबीजमण्डलीं<br />
नवचन्द्रातपसस्यसिद्ध‍ये ॥ १५ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
Has the tiller Time<br />
sown upon the surface of the sky –<br />
watered with darkness to a rich, black mud –<br />
a patch of pristine seed-stars<br />
to cultivate a crop of fresh moonlight?
<span class="ncol">15</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c7_p16" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
अहरत्ययरागपल्लव-<br />
स्तमसा कन्दलितो नभस्तरुः ।<br />
सृजति स्म निरन्तरं हरि-<br />
द्विटपैस्तारककोरकावलिम् ॥ १६ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
The sky was a tree:<br />
the new shoots were the red streaks of the dying day,<br />
the thick foliage they grew into was the darkness,<br />
and at length the tree’s branches,<br />
the directions,<br />
began to burst into an unceasing series of flower-stars.
<span class="ncol">16</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c7_p17" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
अगमन्नभिसारिकाः प्रिया-<br />
ननुरागाञ्जनरञ्जितेक्षणाः ।<br />
अभिनत्तिमिरेऽपि ताः पुनः<br />
श्वसितेनैव सुगन्धिना जनः ॥ १७ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
Departed for their lovers’ houses<br />
*abhisārikās*, 
eyes lined with love’s magical *kajjala*.<br />
Revealed were they even in the darkness<br />
to wayfarers, by their breath so sweetly scented.
<span class="ncol">17</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c7_p18" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
जननीमुपलभ्य यामिनी-<br />
मधिकस्नेहदशाभिवर्धिताः ।<br />
दिवसस्य लयं प्रपेदुषो<br />
गृहदीपा मुहुरर्भका इव ॥ १८ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
Upon the demise of the day,<br />
the lamps in each house,<br />
his orphaned children as it were,<br />
turned to their mother the night<br />
and grew strong with the oil of love she lavished upon them.
<span class="ncol">18</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c7_p19" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
तदनु क्षणदागमोल्लस-<br />
त्कलशाम्भोनिधिवीचिरोचिषः ।<br />
व्यरुचन् कतिचित् कराङ्कुराः<br />
शशिनः शातमखे दिशामुखे ॥ १९ ॥
</p>
<p>
<audio controls="controls">
  <source src="audio/7_19.m4a" type="audio/mpeg" />
  Your browser does not support the audio tag.
</audio> 
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
After that<br />
there shone in the East,<br />
where lives Lord Indra of many a sacrificial feast,<br />
a smattering of soft moonbeams<br />
pale as the whitened waves of the milky ocean<br />
surging in jubilance at the onset of the night<span class="ref"><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c7_en6">6</a></sup></span>.
<span class="ncol">19</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c7_p20" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
तरलालसतारकं मुखं<br />
कलयन्ती शरकाण्डपाण्डरम् ।<br />
विगलत्तिमिराम्बरा बभौ<br />
हरिदैन्द्री हरिणाङ्कगर्भिणी ॥ २० ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
The Eastern zone,<br />
pregnant with the moon full grown,<br />
was resplendent:<br />
her star-eyes now glowing bright now growing dim<br />
her face the shade of a blade of *śara* grass,<br />
and her dress of darkness slipping off.
<span class="ncol">20</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c7_p21" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
अथ किञ्चिददृश्यतैन्दवं<br />
वपुराद्रोदयरागलोहितम् ।<br />
बलशासनदिग्विलासिनी-<br />
मुखसिन्दूरललामकोमलम् ॥ २१ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
Then the orb of the moon<br />
started to show itself,<br />
reddened to crimson by its recent rise,<br />
a delicate dot of *sindūra*<br />
on the face of the Eastern quarter,<br />
Indra’s beloved.
<span class="ncol">21</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c7_p22" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
परिपिण्डितयावकारुणं<br />
प्रचकाशे हिमरश्मिमण्डलम् ।<br />
रचितं नवरक्तसन्ध्यकै-<br />
र्विजयच्छत्रमिवात्मजन्मनः ॥ २२ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
Red as a rounded ball of lac,<br />
the lunar orb looked like<br />
a royal parasol<br />
wreathed with *raktasandhyakas* freshly blooming<br />
for the triumphant Kāma.
<span class="ncol">22</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c7_p23" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
अथ कम्पनृपोऽपि कृत्यवित्<br />
कृतसन्ध्यासमयोचितक्रियः ।<br />
अवदत् सविधे स्थितां प्रियां<br /> 
भुवि गङ्गेत्यभिनन्दिताह्वयाम् ॥ २३ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
King Kampa,<br />
after completing the customary *sandhyā* ceremony,<br />
conscientous as ever,<br />
then turned to speak to the wife he so loved,<br />
she who was known to the world as Gaṅgā<span class="ref"><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c7_en7">7</a></sup></span>.
<span class="ncol">23</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c7_p24" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
कमलाक्षि कटाक्ष्यतामयं<br />
समयो वर्णनया रसार्द्रया ।<br />
जन एष वचस्तवामृतं<br />
श्रवसा पाययितुं कुतूहली ॥ २४ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
‘My lotus-eyed love,<br />
pay homage to this hour<br />
with a description steeped in *rasa*.<br />
He that stands before you<br />
longs to drink in the *amṛta* of your words<br />
with his ears.’
<span class="ncol">24</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c7_p25" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
इति सा दयितेन भाषिता<br />
दरनम्रं दधती मुखाम्बुजम् ।<br />
वदति स्म शनैः शुचिस्मिता<br />
सरसोदारपदां सरस्वतीम् ॥ २५ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
Addressed thus by her lover,<br />
she lowered her lotus face a little,<br />
smiling shyly,<br />
and in measured cadence<br />
started to speak words to inspire wonder and wisdom.
<span class="ncol">25</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c7_p26" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
स्वदमानसुगन्धिमारुतः<br />
प्रसरत्कोमलचन्द्रिकोदयः ।<br />
नृपचन्द्र निरीक्ष्यतामयं<br />
समयः पोषितपुष्पसायकः ॥ २६ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
‘O moon among kings,<br />
how magical is this hour!<br />
Sweetly scented blows the breeze,<br />
velvety moonbeams wander all about<br />
and Love of the flower-shafts flourishes.
<span class="ncol">26</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c7_p27" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
परिरभ्य दृढं चिरागतः<br />
प्रथमाशासुदृशां निशापतिः ।<br />
श्लथयत्ययमंशुभिर्नखै-<br />
स्तिमिरश्रेणिमयीं प्रवेणिकाम् ॥ २७ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
‘See how the moon<br />
after a long absence<br />
clasps the lovely-eyed lady of the East<br />
in a tight embrace,<br />
and undoes her simply tied tresses –<br />
tangles of darkness –<br />
combing it through with the fingernails of his rays.
<span class="ncol">27</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c7_p28" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
प्रथमाचलमौलिमुच्चकै-<br />
रधिरुह्याम्बरपात्रसम्भृतम् ।<br />
अयमंशुमृणालिकामुखै-<br />
स्तिमिरं चूषयतीव चन्द्रमाः ॥ २८ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
‘Ascending the soaring summit of the rising mountain,<br />
the moon seems to suck up the darkness<br />
collected in the goblet of the sky<br />
with his rays as lotus-stalk straws.
<span class="ncol">28</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c7_p29" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
अलिनीलमयस्तमोमयं<br />
प्रविलाप्योदयरागवह्निना ।<br />
कलयत्ययमोषधीश्वरः।<br />
कलधौतं शुचि कौमुदीमिषात् ॥ २९ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
‘Master chemist that he is,<br />
the moon melts down the bee-black iron of darkness<br />
in the red-orange blaze of his rise<br />
forging pure silver<br />
formed in moonlight’s image.
<span class="ncol">29</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c7_p30" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
मुहुरामृशदेव पद्मिनी-<br />
मपि रागी क्षणदाकरः करैः ।<br />
यदमुं प्रति नेयमुन्मुखी<br />
प्रभवत्यत्र पतिव्रतागुणः ॥ ३० ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
‘Flushed pink with desire,<br />
night after night<br />
the moon shrinks not from stroking even the lotus<br />
with rays as roving hands.<br />
Yet still she refuses so much as to look at him –<br />
what firm-founded fidelity!<span class="ref"><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c7_en8">8</a></sup></span>
<span class="ncol">30</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c7_p31" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
अलिविभ्रममन्तरेति य-<br />
न्न विधोस्तन्मृगलक्ष्म किन्त्वयम् ।<br />
पुरजिद्रथचक्रतार्जितो<br />
बहलः कज्जललेपकालिमा ॥ ३१ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
‘This deer etched within the moon –<br />
black as a bee –<br />
is no such thing.<br /> 
It is rather a dark mark<br />
from the grinding of the generously greased axel<br />
when the moon became a chariot wheel<br />
for Śiva, conqueror of Tripura.
<span class="ncol">31</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c7_p32" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
मघवन्मणिभङ्गमेचकः<br />
शशिनि श्यामलिमा चकास्ति यः ।<br />
जनयत्ययमङ्कपालिका-<br />
प्रणयालीननिशीथिनीधियम् ॥ ३२ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
‘This deep blue darkness,<br />
shining like a shard of sapphire within the moon,<br />
makes you think<br />
night has melted into his loving embrace.’
<span class="ncol">32</span>
</p>
</div>

<p class="it">
The remainder of this canto and the beginning of the next are lost.
</p>

[^1]: A fire-breathing mare lives in the ocean.
[^2]: Varuṇa, lord of the sea, presides over the western direction.
[^3]: Lakṣmī here is both the goddess and wealth.
[^4]: Floral patterns were drawn upon women’s faces for decoration.
[^5]: Soot used to be collected in an inverted semi-circular receptacle hanging above a lamp.
[^6]: It is at night that the moon rises, causing the sea to swell.
[^7]: Our poetess, we assume
[^8]: Lotuses bloom only in the presence of their lord, the sun.
</div>
</body>
</html>
