<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en"
xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
   <title>Madhurā Vijayam</title>
   <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/mv.css" />
</head>
<body>
<div class="page">

<div id="c8_p1" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
अधिरङ्गमवाप्तयोगनिद्रं<br />
हरिमुद्वेजयतीति जातभीतिः ।<br />
पतितं मुहुरिष्टकानिकायं<br />
फणचक्रेण निवारयत्यहीन्द्रः ॥ १ ॥ औपच्छन्दसिकम्
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
‘In Śrīraṅga,<br />
Śeṣa, king of snakes,<br />
fearing lest Viṣṇu his master<br />
be rudely awoken from meditative slumber,<br />
shields him from the broken bricks that keep falling<br />
with his thousandfold hoods.
<span class="ncol">1</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c8_p2" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
घुणजग्धकवाटसम्पुटानि<br />
स्फुटदूर्वाङ्कुरसन्धिमण्डपानि ।<br />
श्लथगर्भगृहाणि वीक्ष्य दूये<br />
भृशमन्यान्यपि देवताकुलानि ॥ २ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
‘Other temples too –<br />
shutter-doors devoured by woodworm,<br />
festival halls with *dūrvā* grass sprouting boldly from each crack,<br />
sacredmost shrines crumbling –<br />
drive me to tears when I see them.
<span class="ncol">2</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c8_p3" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
सतताध्वरधूमसौरभैः प्राङ्<br />
निगमोद्घोषणवद्भिरग्रहारैः ।<br />
अधुनाजनि विस्रमांसगन्धै-<br />
रधिकक्षीबतुलुष्कसिंहनादैः ॥ ३ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
‘Earlier, *agrahāras* were filled<br />
with the scented smoke of continuous sacrifice,<br />
with the sound of Vedic chanting.<br />
Now, they are swamped<br />
with the stink of raw meat,<br />
with the drunken roars of inebriate Turks.
<span class="ncol">3</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c8_p4" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
मधुरोपवनं निरीक्ष्य दूये<br />
बहुशः खण्डितनालिकेरषण्डम् ।<br />
परितो नृकरोटिकोटिहार-<br />
प्रचलच्छूलपरम्परापरीतम् ॥ ४ ॥
</p>
<p>
<audio controls="controls">
  <source src="audio/8_4.m4a" type="audio/mpeg" />
  Your browser does not support the audio tag.
</audio> 
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
‘In Madhurā’s gardens<br />
great swathes of coconut groves have been cut down<br />
and all about<br />
serried spikes stand<br />
swaying under the hundreds of long-dead human heads<br />
strung together.<br />
To see it is to weep.
<span class="ncol">4</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c8_p5" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
परितस्तततन्तुवायतन्तु-<br />
व्यतिषङ्गाज्जनितानि जालकानि ।<br />
पुरगोपुरसालभञ्जिकानां<br />
दधते चीनपटावगुण्ठनत्वम् ॥ ५ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
‘Webs wound skilfully by web-weaving spiders,<br />
silken strands stretching in all directions,<br />
robe the carven ladies that crown the town’s gates<br />
in delicate Chinese cloth.
<span class="ncol">5</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c8_p6" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
न तथा कटुघूत्कृताद्व्यथा मे<br />
हृदि जीर्णोपवनेषु घूकलोकात् ।<br />
परिशीलितपारसीकवाग्भ्यो<br />
यवनानां भवने यथा शुकेभ्यः ॥ ६ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
‘It is not the harsh hoots<br />
of owl broods<br />
in gardens run wild,<br />
so much as the parrots practising Persian<br />
in the dwellings of the foreign princelings<br /> 
that torments me.
<span class="ncol">6</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c8_p7" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
स्तनचन्दनपाण्डु ताम्रपर्ण्या-<br />
स्तरुणीनामभवत् पुरा यदम्भः ।<br />
तदसृग्भिरुपैति शोणिमानं<br />
निहतानामभितो गवां नृशंसैः ॥ ७ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
‘The water of the Tāmraparṇī,<br />
which used to run white-yellow<br />
as it washed the sandal paste from young women’s breasts,<br />
has been stained red<br />
with the blood flowing from cows<br />
cruelly slaughtered upon her banks.
<span class="ncol">7</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c8_p8" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
सुवते न यथापुरं वसूनि<br />
क्षितयो वर्षति पूर्ववन्न शक्रः ।<br />
शमनोऽपि जनं नयत्यकाण्डे<br />
विषयेऽस्मिन् यवनैर्हतावशिष्टम् ॥ ८ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
‘The fields no longer favour us with rich crops.<br />  
Indra sends not showers as he used to.<br />
In this land,<br />
even Death drags people away before their time –<br />
those not yet massacred by the foreigners.
<span class="ncol">8</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c8_p9" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
श्रुतिरस्तमिता नयः प्रलीनो<br />
विरता धर्मकथा च्युतं चरित्रम् ।<br />
सुकृतं गतमाभिजात्यमस्तं<br />
किमिवान्यत् कलिरेक एव धन्यः ॥ ९ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
‘The *Veda* has sunk.<br />
The rule of law has fled.<br />
The very word *dharma* has disappeared.<br />
Virtue has vanished.<br />
Merit has away flit.<br />
Nobility has faded.<br />
What else is there to say?<br />
Kali alone flourishes.’
<span class="ncol">9</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c8_p10" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
इति सा निखिलं निवेद्य राज्ञे<br />
यवनानां जनगर्हितं चरित्रम् ।<br />
अतिभीषणमात्मनः प्रभावात्<br />
कमपि प्रादुरभावयत् कृपाणम् ।। १० ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
After thus listing to the King<br />
the Yavanas’ catalogue of crimes<br />
condemned by all,<br />
she<span class="ref"><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c8_en1">1</a></sup></span> produced<br />
with her prodigious powers<br />
a terrifying sword.
<span class="ncol">10</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c8_p11" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
तमरातिनराधिनाथनारी-<br />
नयनाम्भःकणपातहेतुभूतम् ।<br /> 
प्रभुरुन्मिषितस्वरोषवह्ने-<br />
रधिकोद्दामममंस्त धूमदण्डम् ॥ ११ ॥
</p>
<p>
<audio controls="controls">
  <source src="audio/8_11.m4a" type="audio/mpeg" />
  Your browser does not support the audio tag.
</audio> 
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
To the King,<br />
it was a fearsome column of smoke curling up<br />
from the fire of his flaring anger,<br />
making tears drip from<br />
the lashes of the ladies of lords<br />
who raised against him swords.
<span class="ncol">11</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c8_p12" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
प्रणयागतचोलपाण्ड्यलक्ष्मी-<br />
श्रवणेन्दीवरमालिकायमानम् ।<br />
विरचय्य पुरः कृपाणमेषा<br />
पुनरप्याह पुरन्दराभमेनम् ॥ १२ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
This sword was a string of blue lilies adorning the ears<br />
of the tutelary goddesses of the Colas 
and Pāṇḍyas,<br />
who had turned to Kampa in their love.<br />
Placing it before the doughty king,<br />
daring as Indra, destroyer of cities,<br />
she spoke once again.
<span class="ncol">12</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c8_p13" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
नरनाथ पुरा कृपाणमेनं<br />
विरचय्याखिलदेवतायुधांशैः ।<br />
उपदीकृतवान् पिनाकपाणे-<br />
र्दनुजानां विजयाय विश्वकर्मा ॥ १३ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
‘Long ago,<br />
O King of Karṇāṭa,<br />
Viśvakarmā fashioned this sword<br />
with elements from each of the gods’ weapons,<br />
and presented it to Śiva<br />
to defeat the *dānavas*.
<span class="ncol">13</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c8_p14" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
अमुमुग्रतपःकृतप्रसादः<br />
प्रददौ पाण्ड्यनृपाय सोऽपि देवः ।<br />
यमुपेत्य चिरेण तस्य वंश्याः<br />
पृथिवीमप्रतिशासनामशासन् ॥ १४ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
‘Śiva in turn presented it to the Pāṇḍya king,<br />
pleased with the severity of his *tapas*.<br />
Once in possession of the sword,<br />
his descendants governed the land<br />
with none to gainsay their governance<br />
for many a year.
<span class="ncol">14</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c8_p15" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
अथ कालवशेन पाण्ड्यवंश्यान्<br />
गतवीर्यानवधार्य कुम्भजन्मा ।<br />
मनुजेश्वर मण्डलाग्रमेनं<br />
भवते प्रेषितवान् महाभुजाय ।। १५ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
‘Seeing the Pāṇḍyas’ 
power disappear over time,<br />
Agastya has now sent this sword to you,<br />
Your Most Mighty Majesty.
<span class="ncol">15</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c8_p16" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
अमुनाशु विशस्य दक्षिणस्यां<br />
मधुरायां पुरि कंसवन्नृशंसम् ।<br />
यवनाधिपतिं बलोत्तरस्त्वं<br />
विदधीथाः स्फुटमच्युतावतारम् ॥ १६ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
‘With this sword straightaway eliminate<br />
the Yavana potentate –<br />
cruel as Kaṃsa –<br />
in the Madhurā of the South,<br />
accompanied by your valour,<br />
as Kṛṣṇa was by Balarāma.<br />
Let the world know you<br />
as the incarnation of the god himself!’<span class="ref"><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c8_en2">2</a></sup></span>
<span class="ncol">16</span>
</p>
</div>

<p class="it">
Again the end of this canto, and the beginning and end of the final canto, are lost.
</p>

[^1]: Due to the loss of several verses in the manuscript, it is not clear who this female messenger is.
[^2]: Kṛṣṇa killed his tyrant uncle Kaṃsa in another city called Madhurā (now Mathura) in northern India; Balarāma was his elder brother and constant companion.

</div>
</body>
</html>
