<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en"
	xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
   <title>Madhurā Vijayam</title>
   <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/mv.css" />
</head>
<body>
<div class="page">

<div id="c2_p1" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		अथास्य वंशप्रतिरोहबीजं<br />
		महीभुजो गर्भमधत्त देवी ।<br />
		जगत्त्रयोद्भूतिनिदानभूतं<br />
		तेजो विधातुः प्रथमेव सृष्टिः ॥ १ ॥ उपजातिः
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		In time the King sired upon the Queen<br />
		the seed which would perpetuate the dynasty –<br />
		just as the creator sires upon primaeval matter<br />
		the energy which brings into being the three worlds.
		<span class="ncol">1</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c2_p2" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		मुखेन तन्वी शरपाण्डरेण<br />
		विमुक्तरत्नाभरणा विरेजे ।<br />
		विलूनराजीववना दिनान्ते<br />
		छायाशशाङ्केन शरन्नदीव ॥ २ ॥
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		Slender,<br />
		no more oppressed by ornaments,<br />
		her round face reed-pale,<br />
		the Queen resembled a river run to a trickle in Śarad,<br />
		no longer blanketed in day-blossoming lotus blooms,<br />
		harbouring the orbed moon<br />
		as night draws near.
		<span class="ncol">2</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c2_p3" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		अनन्यसामान्यभुजापदान-<br />
		मुत्पत्स्यमानं तनयं नृपस्य ।<br />
		अनारतं वीररसानुबन्धं<br />
		न्यवेदयद्दौहृदमेव देव्याः ॥ ३ ॥
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		The pregnant queen’s cravings<br /> 
		ever veered towards the heroic,<br /> 
		suggesting that the royal heir she would soon bear<br />
		would author deeds assayed by no other.
		<span class="ncol">3</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c2_p4" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		अपारयन्ती चरितैणशाबं<br />
		क्रीडाचलोपान्तमपि प्रयातुम् ।<br />
		आखेटरागादधिरोढुमैच्छ-<br />
		न्माद्यन्मृगेन्द्रान् मलयाद्रिकूटान् ॥ ४ ॥
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		So spent was her strength<br />
		she couldn’t even reach<br />
		the foot of the ornamental hill<br />
		where fawns scampered,<br />
		yet in her thirst for a kill<br />
		she dreamed of climbing the mighty Malaya mountain<br />
		to hunt maddened lions.
		<span class="ncol">4</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c2_p5" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		पृथ्वी रथः सारथिरब्जसूतिः<br />
		शेषेण सज्यं धनुरद्रिराजः ।<br />
		शरश्च शौरिः किल हन्त लक्ष्यं<br />
		त्रयं पुरामित्यहसत् पुरारिम् ॥ ५ ॥
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		‘The earth for a chariot;<br />
		Brahmā himself the charioteer.<br />
		The king of snakes serving as bowstring,<br />
		and Mount Meru his bow.<br />
		And, so they say,<br />
		no less than Śauri<span class="ref"><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c2_en1">1</a></sup></span> as his shaft.<br />
		To fight whom?<br />
		A mere triad of cities!’<br />
		Thus did she scorn Śiva,<br />
		conqueror of the three cities.<span class="ref"><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c2_en2">2</a></sup></span>
		<span class="ncol">5</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c2_p6" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		सौभाग्यगन्धद्विपदानलेखा<br />
		रराज तस्या नवरोमराजिः ।<br />
		तेजोनिधिं गर्भतले निषण्णं<br />
		कालोरगी रक्षितुमागतेव ॥ ६ ॥
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		A fresh line of fine hair flashed below her navel –<br />
		glistening like a streak of ichor from<br />
		the mighty elephant of her waxing fortune –<br />
		as though it were a cobra<br />
		come to guard the luminous treasure<br />
		buried deep within her womb.<span class="ref"><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c2_en3">3</a></sup></span>		
		<span class="ncol">6</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c2_p7" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		अथ प्रशस्ते दिवसे समस्तै-<br />
		र्मौहूर्तिकैः साधितपुण्यलग्ने ।<br />
		असूत सूनुं नरनाथपत्नी<br />
		देवी महासेनमिवेन्दुमौलेः ॥ ७ ॥
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		Then on the happy day –<br />
		declared by astrologers near and far<br />
		to be blessed with an auspicious star –<br />
		the earthly lord’s lady<br />
		bore a son who would lead a mighty army;<br />
		just as Pārvatī,<br />
		consort to the moon-crested Śiva,<br />
		bore Kumāra, leader of heaven’s army.
		<span class="ncol">7</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c2_p8" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		महौजसस्तस्य निजैर्यशोभि-<br />
		रुद्वेलदुग्धोदधिपूरगौरैः ।<br />
		प्रक्षालितानीव तदा बभूवु-<br />
		र्धृतप्रसादानि दिशां मुखानि ॥ ८ ॥
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		At that moment,<br />
		the faces of the directions grew clear<br />
		as if washed clean by the gleaming child’s glory,<br />
		white as the flood of the milky sea spilling its shores.
		<span class="ncol">8</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c2_p9" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		आगामिनीमध्वरहव्यसिद्धिं<br />
		निश्चित्य देशेष्वपि दक्षिणेषु ।<br />
		प्रदक्षिणीभूतशिखाकलापो<br />
		ननर्त हर्षादिव हव्यवाहः ॥ ९ ॥
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		Realising that sacrificial oblations<br />
		would soon be offered in the South too,<br />
		the fire danced a jig of joy,<br />
		weaving his mass of flames into worshipful arcs –<br />
		or so it seemed.		
		<span class="ncol">9</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c2_p10" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		सुखायमानां सुतजन्मवार्तां<br />
		सहर्षमावेदयते जनाय ।<br />
		अवाञ्छदात्मानमपि प्रदातुं<br />
		कुतूहली कुन्तलभूमिपालः ॥ १० ॥
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		In his euphoria,<br />
		the <span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls30">Kuntala</a></span> king<br />
		was ready to give his very self<br />
		to the exultant servants<br />
		bringing the sweet news<br />
		of his son’s birth.		
		<span class="ncol">10</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c2_p11" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		विशृङ्खलास्तस्य गिरा निरीयुः<br />
		कारागृहेभ्यो विमतावरोधाः ।<br />
		तुलुष्कबन्दीनिवहाय तूर्ण-<br />
		मागामिने दातुमिवावाकाशम् ॥ ११ ॥
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		Upon the Emperor’s orders,<br />
		the womenfolk of the vanquished<br />
		were unshackled and released from their prison cells,<br />
		as if to make room<br />
		for the trillion <span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls47">Tuluṣka</a></span> wives and daughters,<br />
		soon to arrive.
		<span class="ncol">11</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c2_p12" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		स्नातस्ततो धौतदुकूलधारी<br />
		वितीर्य भूरि द्रविणं द्विजेभ्यः ।<br />
		महीपतिः पुत्रमुखं दिदृक्षुः<br />
		प्राविक्षदन्तःपुरमात्तहर्षः ॥ १२ ॥
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		Then the King,<br />
		after bathing and dressing in sparkling new silks,<br />
		bestowed lavish gifts upon Brahmins.<br />
		Longing to look upon his new-born son,<br /> 
		he came to his queens’ quarters<br />
		aquiver with joy.		
		<span class="ncol">12</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c2_p13" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		अवैक्षत क्षामशरीरयष्टेः<br />
		कुमारमुत्सङ्गगतं स देव्याः ।<br />
		शरत्कृशाया इव शैवलिन्या-<br />
		स्तरङ्गलग्नं कलहंसशाबम् ॥ १३ ॥
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		He beheld his son<br />
		rocking in the lap of the Queen,<br />
		her thin frame grown frail,<br />
		like a young <span class="it"><span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls15">haṃsa</a></span></span><br />
		bobbing upon the billow of a river<br />
		slimmed by Śarad.
		<span class="ncol">13</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c2_p14" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		मुहुर्मुहुः पल्लवपाटलेन<br />
		मुष्टीकृतेन द्वितयेन पाण्योः ।<br />
		अरातिलक्ष्मीकचसञ्चयाना-<br />
		माकर्षशिक्षामिव शीलयन्तम् ॥ १४ ॥		
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		As the child formed fists again and again<br />
		with hands pale pink like fresh shoots,<br />
		it seemed he was practising<br />
		how to wrest from his rivals<br />
		the tutelary goddess of each,<br />
		dragging them by their tightly tied braids.
		<span class="ncol">14</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c2_p15" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		अव्याजसौन्दर्यगुणाभिरामं<br />
		कुमारमालोकयतश्चिराय ।<br />
		नृपस्य निष्पन्ददृशो मुहूर्त-<br />
		मानन्दबाष्पोऽभवदन्तरायः ॥ १५ ॥
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		A tear of joy for a moment obscured<br />
		the Lord’s long and unblinking gaze<br />
		as he stared at the child he had sired,<br />
		enthralled by his unadorned beauty.		
		<span class="ncol">15</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c2_p16" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		आश्लिष्यतस्तस्य दृशा तनूज-<br />
		मन्तः प्रहर्षेण विजृम्भितेन ।<br />
		प्रायः प्रणुन्नैर्बहिरङ्गकेभ्यः<br />
		प्रादुर्बभूवे पुलकप्ररोहैः ॥ १६ ॥
	</p>
	<p>
		<audio controls="controls">
		  <source src="audio/2_16.m4a" type="audio/mpeg" />
		  Your browser does not support the audio tag.
		</audio> 
	</p>	
	<p class="enpoem">
		As the King drank in his son with his eyes,<br />
		the happiness within him swelled to bursting<br />
		and appeared to push out the very hair<br />
		on each part of his body<br />
		so that he prickled with goosebumps.
		<span class="ncol">16</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c2_p17" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		आकम्पयिष्यत्ययमेकवीरः<br />
		संग्रामरङ्गे सकलानरातीन् ।<br />
		इत्येव निश्चित्य स दीर्घदर्शी<br />
		नाम्ना सुतं कम्पन इत्यकार्षीत् ॥ १७ ॥
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		With great prescience<br />
		the King knew that the boy would become<br />
		a warrior matched by none,<br />
		terrorising every one of his enemies<br />
		in the hurly-burly of battle,<br />
		and thus named him <span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls20">Kampana</a></span>,<br />
		The Terrifying.		
		<span class="ncol">17</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c2_p18" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		क्रमेण धात्रीजनशिक्षितानि<br />
		वचांसि यातानि च मन्थराणि ।<br />
		स्खलत्पदान्यस्य धराधिनाथो<br />
		निशम्य दृष्ट्वा च स निर्वृतोऽभूत् ॥ १८ ॥
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		In due course,<br />
		the sight and sound of his son,<br />
		guided by the nurses,<br />
		tottering and tripping over<br />
		his first faltering syllables and steps,<br />
		brought the emperor of the earth true bliss.		
		<span class="ncol">18</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c2_p19" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		कलक्वणत्काञ्चनकिङ्किणीकं<br />
		गृहाङ्गणे जानुचरं कुमारम् ।<br />
		आलोकयन्तावमृताम्बुराशे-<br />
		र्मग्नाविवान्तः पितरावभूताम् ॥ १९ ॥
	</p>
	<p>
		<audio controls="controls">
		  <source src="audio/2_19.m4a" type="audio/mpeg" />
		  Your browser does not support the audio tag.
		</audio> 
	</p>	
	<p class="enpoem">
		Watching their son<br />
		crawling on all fours in the courtyard,<br />
		his baby golden bells babbling blithely,<br />
		his parents felt as if<br />
		they had dived into a deep ocean of <span class="it">amṛta</span>.		
		<span class="ncol">19</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c2_p20" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		पशुपतिरिव नेत्रैः सोमसूर्याग्निरूपै-<br />
		र्नय इव निरपायैः प्राभवोत्साहमन्त्रैः ।<br />
		भव इव पुरुषार्थैर्धर्मकामार्थसंज्ञै-<br />
		स्त्रिभिरपि नरपालस्तैस्तनूजैरभासीत् ॥ २० ॥ मालिनी		
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		As Śiva with his triad of eyes –<br />
		the moon, the sun and fire;<br />
		as sovereignty with its inseparable triple supports –<br />
		dominion, determination and counsel;<br />
		as this worldly life with its threefold goals<br />
		<span class="it">dharma, kāma</span> and <span class="it">artha</span> –<br />
		so the King shone with his three sons<span class="ref"><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c2_en4">4</a></sup></span>.
		<span class="ncol">20</span>
	</p>
</div>

	<aside epub:type="footnote" id="c2_en1">
		<p>Viṣṇu</p>
	</aside>
	<aside epub:type="footnote" id="c2_en2">
		<p>Śiva had all this and more when he went to fight the <span class="it">asuras’</span> Tripura.</p>
	</aside>
	<aside epub:type="footnote" id="c2_en3">
		<p>Snakes are often thought of as guardians of treasure.</p>
	</aside>
	<aside epub:type="footnote" id="c2_en4">
		<p>The poetess earlier described, in a verse not included here, how Bukkarāja had two more sons by Devāyī.</p>
	</aside>

</div>
</body>
</html>
