<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en"
xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
   <title>Madhurā Vijayam</title>
   <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/mv.css" />
</head>
<body>
<div class="page">

<div id="c1_p1" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
महाकविमुखाम्भोजमणिपञ्जरशारिकाम् ।<br />
चैतन्यजलधिज्योत्स्नां देवीं वन्दे सरस्वतीम् ॥ १ ॥ अनुष्टुभ्
</p>
<p>
<audio controls="controls">
  <source src="audio/1_1.m4a" type="audio/mpeg" />
  Your browser does not support the audio tag.
</audio> 
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
To the goddess of speech,<br />
Sarasvatī,<br />
do I bow –<br />
a *śārikā* in the bejewelled birdcages<br />
of the best bards’ lotus mouths,<br />
the moonlight<br />
rousing the ocean of human consciousness.
<span class="ncol">1</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c1_p2" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
निर्दोषाप्यगुणा वाणी न विद्वज्जनरञ्जिनी ।<br />
पतिव्रताप्यरूपा स्त्री परिणेत्रे न रोचते ॥ २ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
A poem may be sound,<br /> 
but unless sweet<br />
it will not delight the literati.<br />
A wife may be faithful,<br />
but unless pretty<br />
she will not please her spouse.
<span class="ncol">2</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c1_p3" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
न प्रार्थनीयः सत्काव्यश्रुत्यै सहृदयो जनः ।<br />
स्वादुपुष्परसास्वादे कः प्रेरयति षट्पदम् ॥ ३ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
A man of taste needs no encouragement<br />
to listen to good poetry.<br />
Who urges the bee<br />
to sip the sweet nectar seeping from blown buds?
<span class="ncol">3</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c1_p4" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
तन्मदीयमिदं काव्यं विबुधाः श्रोतुमर्हथ ।<br />
मधुराविजयं नाम चरितं कम्पभूपतेः ॥ ४ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
Learned listeners!<br />
Give ear<br />
to this poem here,<br />
*Madhurā Vijaya – The Conquest of Madhurā,*<br />
the story of King Kampa.
<span class="ncol">4</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c1_p5" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
आसीत् समस्तसामन्तमस्तकन्यस्तशासनः ।<br />
बुक्कराज इति ख्यातो राजा हरिहरानुजः ॥ ५ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
There lived a king<br />
named Bukkarāja,<br /> 
the younger brother of Harihara.<br />
Brave kings from each border<br />
with heads bent consented to his every order.
<span class="ncol">5</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c1_p6" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
विवेकमेव सचिवं धनुरेव वरूथिनीम् ।<br />
बाहुमेव रणोत्साहे यः सहायममन्यत ॥ ६ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
When waging war,<br />
he needed no counsel but his own judgement,<br />
no troops but his own bow<br />
no allies but his two arms.
<span class="ncol">6</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c1_p7" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
विरोधिवाहिनीनाथविक्षोभणपटीयसा ।<br />
भुजेन भूभृता यस्य प्राप्ता कीर्तिमयी सुधा ॥ ७ ॥
</p>
<p>
<audio controls="controls">
  <source src="audio/1_7.m4a" type="audio/mpeg" />
  Your browser does not support the audio tag.
</audio> 
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
Roiling the whole host of hostile kings,<br />
vast as the ocean,<br />
with the mountain of his globe-bearing arm –<br />
child’s play for him –<br />
he produced his own *amṛta*, fame.<span class="ref">
<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c1_en1">1</a></sup></span>
<span class="ncol">7</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c1_p8" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
परिपन्थिनृपप्राणपवनाहारदारुणः ।<br />
असृजद्भुजगो यस्य कृपाणः कीर्तिकञ्चुकम् ॥ ८ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
The sword he wielded was a snake,<br />
violently devouring the very air his adversaries breathed,<br />
and slewing off the celebrity he secured<br />
as its now whitened skin.
<span class="ncol">8</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c1_p9" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
कलिकालमहाघर्मप्लुष्टो धर्ममहीरुहः ।<br />
यस्य दानाम्बुसेकेन पुनरङ्कुरितोऽभवत् ॥ ९ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
The tree of *dharma*,<br />
seared clear of moisture<br />
by the horrendous heat of the accursed Kali Yuga,<br />
sprouted afresh with the water he poured<br />
while handing out gifts<span class="ref">
<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c1_en2">2</a></sup></span>.
<span class="ncol">9</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c1_p10" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
यस्याङ्घ्रिपीठसङ्घर्षरेखालाञ्छितमौलयः ।<br />
आशास्वरिनृपा एव जयस्तम्भतया स्थिताः ॥ १० ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
The very kings who had opposed him<br />
became his victory pillars<br />
spread in every direction,<br />
their heads scarred with lines<br />
scored from prostrating at his footstool.<span class="ref">
<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c1_en3">3</a></sup></span>
<span class="ncol">10</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c1_p11" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
बद्धाः सभाङ्गणे यस्य भान्ति स्म जयसिन्धुराः ।<br />
बन्दीकृता इवाम्भोदा जैत्रयात्रानिरोधिनः ॥ ११ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
War elephants<br />
stood shackled in the palace courtyard<br />
as though they were hulking rainclouds<br />
thrown into chains<br />
for daring to halt his military assaults.
<span class="ncol">11</span>
</p>
</div>


<div id="c1_p12" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
तस्यासीद्विजया नाम विजयार्जितसम्पदः ।<br />
राजधानी बुधैः श्लाघ्या शक्रस्येवामरावती ॥ १२ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
As Indra has Amarāvatī glorified by the gods,<br />
the King –<br />
grown rich on triumph –<br />
had for his capital a city celebrated by poets,<br />
known to all as Vijayā 
– ‘Triumph’.
<span class="ncol">12</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c1_p13" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
सुरलोकान्तसंक्रान्तस्वर्णदीमत्सरादिव ।<br />
परिखाकारतां यान्त्या परीता तुङ्गभद्र‌‍या ॥ १३ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
The Tuṅgabhadrā circled the city,<br /> 
serving as a moat,<br />
as if to rival the Gaṅgā<br />
who gushes around the bounds of the gods’ domain.
<span class="ncol">13</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c1_p14" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
लक्ष्मीलतालवालेन क्ष्मावधूनाभिशोभिना ।<br />
चक्राचलप्रकारेण प्राकारेण परिष्कृता ॥ १४ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
A smart rampart wreathed the royal city of Vijayā,<br />
as though it was<br />
the pool in which her flowering fortune-creeper flourished,<br />
the lovely navel of Lady Earth<br />
or a circle of soaring mountains.
<span class="ncol">14</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c1_p15" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
यशःस्तोमैरिवाशेषनगरीविजयार्जितैः ।<br />
सौधैः प्रकाशितोत्सेधा शरदम्भोदपाण्डरैः ॥ १५ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
Mansions white as clouds in Śarad –<br />
drifts of fame<br />
amassed by outshining all other cities –<br />
spoke of her stature.
<span class="ncol">15</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c1_p16" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
यत्सौधचन्द्रशालासु विहरन्त्यो मृगेक्षणाः ।<br />
शशाङ्कमवलम्बन्ते मुक्ताकन्दुकशङ्क‍या ॥ १६ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
The doe-eyed ladies<br />
playing in the sky-high attics<br />
of the city’s palaces<br />
would try to catch the full moon,<br />
foolishly mistaking it for their pearl-embroidered ball.
<span class="ncol">16</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c1_p17" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
पद्मरागोपलोत्कीर्णप्रासादप्रान्तवर्तिनः ।<br />
सन्ततं यत्र दृश्यन्ते सान्ध्या इव बलाहकाः ॥ १७ ॥
</p>
<p>
<audio controls="controls">
  <source src="audio/1_17.m4a" type="audio/mpeg" />
  Your browser does not support the audio tag.
</audio> 
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
Clouds<br />
roaming around her ruby-reddened rooftops<br />
seemed to be permanently stained<br />
by the setting sun.
<span class="ncol">17</span>
</p>
</div>


<div id="c1_p18" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
सन्ध्यासु यत्र निर्यान्ति जालेभ्यो धूपराजयः ।<br />
अन्तःप्रदीपिकालोकचकितध्वान्तसन्निभाः ॥ १८ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
Every evening,<br />
trails of incense smoke would race<br />
out of the city’s windows,<br />
as though they were gangs of darkness<br />
frightened into flight at the sight<br />
of the oil lamps standing guard within.
<span class="ncol">18</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c1_p19" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
देवायी नाम तस्यासीद्देवी वसुमतीपतेः ।<br />
पद्मा पद्मेक्षणस्येव शङ्करस्येव पार्वती ॥ १९ ॥
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
The chief queen of this emperor of the earth,<br /> 
known as Devāyī,<br />
was to him<br />
as the lotus-abiding Lakṣmī to the lotus-eyed Viṣṇu,<br />
as to Śiva Pārvatī.
<span class="ncol">19</span>
</p>
</div>

<div id="c1_p20" class="poem1">
<p class="devpoem">
कर्णाटलोकनयनोत्सवपूर्णचन्द्रः<br />
साकं तया हृदयसम्मतया नरेन्द्रः ।<br />
कालोचितान्यनुभवन् क्रमशः सुखानि<br /> 
वीरश्चिराय विजयापुरमध्यवात्सीत् ॥ २० ॥ वसन्ततिलका
</p>
<p class="enpoem">
This brave king,<br />
the brightening full moon<br />
upon which his Karṇāṭa people gazed in delight,<br />
dwelled in Vijayā for many a year,<br />
enjoying in turn the pleasures suited to each stage of life,<br />
with her<br />
his soul-mate.
<span class="ncol">20</span>
</p>
</div>

[^1]: The King’s arm is here compared to Mount Mandara which was used to churn the ocean to produce *amṛta*.
[^2]: Water was ritually sprinkled upon the hands of those receiving gifts.
[^3]: Victory pillars were erected by kings to mark the boundaries of their new-won domains and would be engraved with a declaration of their rule.
</div>
</body>
</html>

