<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en"
	xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
   <title>Madhurā Vijayam</title>
   <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/mv.css" />
</head>
<body>
<div class="page">

<div id="c4_p1" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		अन्येद्युरथ राजीववनजीवनदायिनि ।<br />
		लोकैकदीपे भगवत्युदिते भानुमालिनि ॥ १ ॥  अनुष्टुभ्		
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		The next day,<br />
		as the solar lord,<br />
		lustrous rejuvenator of lotus clusters,<br />
		single lamp for all three worlds,<br />
		rose, 
		<span class="ncol">1</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c4_p2" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		विहाय निद्रां विधिवन्निर्मिताहर्मुखक्रियः ।<br />
		आदिक्षत् पृतनाध्यक्षान् सेनासन्नहनाय सः ॥ २ ॥
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		the Prince awoke,<br />
		and after performing the prescribed prayers,<br />
		ordered the generals to array the army. 		
		<span class="ncol">2</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c4_p3" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		विजृम्भमाणे प्रस्थानशारदारम्भसम्भ्रमे ।<br />
		नृपाणां चामरालीभिर्मरालीभिरभूयत ॥ ३ ॥
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		As the army’s excitement at marching out<br />
		bubbled over<br />
		like the carnival atmosphere at Śarad’s arrival,<br />
		the succession of <span class="it"><span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls7">cāmaras</a></span></span><br />
		fanning each king<br />
		became a procession of <span class="it"><span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls15">haṃsas</a></span></span>.
		<span class="ncol">3</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c4_p4" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		पोषितो हयहेषाभिर्बृंहितो गजबृंहितैः ।<br />
		वर्धितस्तूर्यनिध्वानैः कोऽपि कोलाहलोऽभवत् ॥ ४ ॥
	</p>
	<p>
		<audio controls="controls">
		  <source src="audio/4_4.m4a" type="audio/mpeg" />
		  Your browser does not support the audio tag.
		</audio> 
	</p>	
	<p class="enpoem">
		Magnified by the neighing of horses,<br />
		triplified by the trumpeting of elephants,<br />
		amplified by the beating of drums,<br />
		a defeaning din broke out.
		<span class="ncol">4</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c4_p5" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		अथ निर्गत्य भवनादवैक्ष्यत महीक्षिता ।<br />
		धारितस्तोरणाभ्यर्णे तुङ्गस्तुरगपुङ्गवः ॥ ५ ॥
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		As he came out of the palace,<br />
		the King saw his tall, trusted stallion,<br />
		held ready for him near the arched entrance.		
		<span class="ncol">5</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c4_p6" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		जवाधरितजम्भारितुरङ्गभ्रमकारिणम् ।<br />
		मणिकुट्टिमसंक्रान्तमाक्रामन् बिम्बमात्मनः ॥ ६ ॥		
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		Standing atop his own reflection,<br />
		deep within the jewel-glazed floor,<br /> 
		the horse seemed to have subjugated Indra’s steed –<br />
		no match for his speed.
		<span class="ncol">6</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c4_p7" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		मुखलीनखलीनाहिरच्छपल्ययनच्छदः ।<br />
		वपुषापि गरुत्मन्तमनुगन्तुमिवोत्सुकः ॥ ७ ॥
	</p>
	<p>
		<audio controls="controls">
		  <source src="audio/4_7.m4a" type="audio/mpeg" />
		  Your browser does not support the audio tag.
		</audio> 
	</p>	
	<p class="enpoem">
		The bridle bit idly gripped in his mouth<br />
		was a serpent,<br />
		the neatly stitched saddle<br />
		flapping against his flanks<br />
		was a pair of wings.<br />
		It was as if he wanted to taunt Garuḍa<br />
		by rivalling him in appearance too.
		<span class="ncol">7</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c4_p8" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		लोलवालाग्रलग्नेन सेव्यमानो नभस्वता ।<br />
		रंहोरहस्यशिक्षार्थं शिष्यतामिव जग्मुषा ॥ ८ ॥
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		It seemed that the wind,<br />
		clinging to the tip of his tremulous tail<br />
		in attendance upon him,<br />
		had become his pupil<br />
		to perfect the secret science of speed.
		<span class="ncol">8</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c4_p9" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		मुहुः स्वजवसंरोधनमितोन्नमिताननः ।<br />
		नमस्कुर्वन्निव पुरोवर्तिनीं विजयश्रियम् ॥ ९ ॥
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		Impatient to be off<br />
		he tossed his head up and down,<br />
		straining against the reins,<br />
		as though paying his respects<br />
		to the goddess of victory before him.
		<span class="ncol">9</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c4_p10" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		देहबन्धमिवोत्साहं तमारुह्य महीपतिः ।<br />
		अमंस्त पृथिवीं सर्वामात्मनो हस्तवर्तिनीम् ॥ १० ॥
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		As he mounted this horse –<br />
		or rather his determination<br />
		in the shape of a horse –<br />
		the King felt he held the entire earth<br />
		in the palm of his hand.
		<span class="ncol">10</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c4_p11" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		अथ कम्पमहीपालः कम्पयन् द्विषतां मनः ।<br />
		प्रातिष्ठत दिशं भेजे मलयाचलमुद्रिताम् ॥ ११ ॥		
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		Then King Kampa The Terrifiying,<br />
		terrorising his foes to their very hearts,<br />
		set out and headed in the direction<br />
		marked by Mount Malaya.		
		<span class="ncol">11</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c4_p12" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		रजोभिर्मुहुरुद्धूतैर्लघूभवति भूभरे ।<br />
		कथञ्चित् पृतनाभारं चक्षमे फणिनां पतिः ॥ १२ ॥		
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		The dust that his troops kept pounding up<br />
		lightened the load of the globe,<br />
		thus stopping Śeṣa,<br />
		just,<br />
		from collapsing under the army’s weight.
		<span class="ncol">12</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c4_p13" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		प्रतापादित्यकीर्तीन्दुयुगपद्ग्रासलालसः ।<br />
		परागः परभूपानामुपरागोऽभवन्नवः ॥ १३ ॥		
	</p>
	<p>
		<audio controls="controls">
		  <source src="audio/4_13.m4a" type="audio/mpeg" />
		  Your browser does not support the audio tag.
		</audio> 
	</p>	
	<p class="enpoem">
		Endeavouring to devour both sun and moon –<br />
		the fiery heroism and gleaming fame of the King’s enemies –<br />
		simultaneously,<br />
		this cloud of dust became the shroud of an eclipse,<br />
		the likes of which the world has never seen.
		<span class="ncol">13</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c4_p14" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		पांसुस्थगनलक्षेण पलायत रविः क्वचित् ।<br />
		भावियुद्धामरीभूतवीरोद्दलनशङ्कितः ॥ १४ ॥		
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		Using the dust as a screen<br />
		the sun fled to some unknown land,<br />
		terrified of being punctured<br />
		by the heroes destined to win immortality<br />
		in the battle to come.<span class="ref"><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c4_en1">1</a></sup></span>
		<span class="ncol">14</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c4_p15" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		वितेनिरे करेणूनां करशीकररेणवः ।<br />
		घनस्य सेनारजसः करकाकारचातुरीम् ॥ १५ ॥		
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		The spray spurting from elephants’ trunks<br />
		staged a show of showering hailstones<br />
		as the dust of the army thickened into a cloud.
		<span class="ncol">15</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c4_p16" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		अथ लङ्घितकर्णाटः पञ्चषैरेव वासरैः ।<br />
		प्रापत् कम्पमहीपालः कण्टकाननपट्टनम् ॥ १६ ॥
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		Then King Kampa,<br />
		having crossed the <span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls23">Karṇāṭa</a></span> land<br />
		in just five or six days,<br />
		reached the city of <span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls22">Kaṇṭakānana</a></span>.
		<span class="ncol">16</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c4_p17" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		स तत्र दिवसान् कांश्चिदतिवाह्य महाबलः।<br />
		अभिषेणयितुं चम्पमुपाक्रमत कालवित् ॥ १७ ॥		
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		There that mighty king spent several days<br />
		before he set out to attack <span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls8">Campa</a></span>,<br />
		carefully choosing his moment.
		<span class="ncol">17</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c4_p18" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		प्रसृतैस्तच्चमूधूलिस्तोमैः क्षीरतरङ्गिणी ।<br />
		कीर्त्या चम्पक्षितीन्द्रस्य साकं कलुषतामगात् ॥ १८ ॥
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		The billows of dust<br />
		kicked up by the marching troops<br />
		blackened the milk-white waters of the <span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls27">Kṣīrasindhu</a></span>,<br />
		along with King <span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls8">Campa’s</a></span> repute.
		<span class="ncol">18</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c4_p19" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		स दुग्धवाहिनीवीचिमारुताधूतशाखिनि ।<br />
		विरिञ्चिनगराभ्यर्णे न्यवेशयदनीकिनीम् ॥ १९ ॥
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		The <span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls23">Karṇāṭa</a></span> 
		king stationed his army near <span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls51">Viriñcinagara</a></span>,<br />
		where the breeze<br />
		from the wave-whipped waters of the <span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls27">Kṣīrasindhu</a></span><br />
		rustled the trees.		
		<span class="ncol">19</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c4_p20" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		अथ सन्नद्धसैन्यस्तं न्यरुन्ध द्रमिडाधिपम् ।<br />
		घनीकृतहिमानीको हेमन्त इव भास्करम् ॥ २० ॥
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		Then Kampa,<br />
		army arrayed,<br /> 
		laid siege to the <span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls13">Dramiḍa</a></span> king<br />
		just as Hemanta,<br />
		blizzards massed,<br />
		lays siege to the sun.
		<span class="ncol">20</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c4_p21" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		संवर्तमारुताक्षिप्तसमुद्रद्व‍यसन्निभौ ।<br />
		व्यूहौ द्रमिडकर्णाटनाथयोः सन्निपेततुः ॥ २१ ॥		
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		Like two oceans<br />
		hurled together by the gales of <span class="it"><span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls35">pralaya</a></span></span>,<br />
		the squadrons of the <span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls13">Dramiḍa</a></span> and 
		<span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls23">Karṇāṭa</a></span> kings<br />
		crashed upon each other.
		<span class="ncol">21</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c4_p22" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		रजस्तमसि वीरास्त्रसङ्घसङ्घट्टनोत्थितैः ।<br />
		बभ्रे स्फुलिङ्गसङ्घातैः खद्योतनिवहद्युतिः ॥ २२ ॥		
	</p>
	<p>
		<audio controls="controls">
		  <source src="audio/4_22.m4a" type="audio/mpeg" />
		  Your browser does not support the audio tag.
		</audio> 
	</p>	
	<p class="enpoem">
		The millions of sparks that flew forth<br />
		as weapon after weapon of the warring warriors clashed<br />
		lit up<br />
		like so many flashing fireflies<br />
		the dust deepening into dusk.
		<span class="ncol">22</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c4_p23" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		क्षतजार्द्राः प्रवीराणां प्रेङ्खन्त्यः खड्गलेखिकाः ।<br />
		जिघत्सतः कृतान्तस्य जिह्वा इव विरेजिरे ॥ २३ ॥		
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		Swords brandished by brave soldiers,<br /> 
		slick with blood,<br />
		flicked back and forth<br />
		as if they were the rampaging tongues of ravenous Death.		
		<span class="ncol">23</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c4_p24" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		आस्रापगासु परितो निःसृतासु सहस्रशः ।<br />
		भटानां भल्लनिर्लूनैरम्भोजायितमाननैः ॥ २४ ॥		
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		All around<br />
		rivers of blood<br />
		rushing forth in a myriad of reds<br />
		brimmed with lotuses –<br />
		heroes’ heads sliced off by <span class="it"><span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls4">bhalla</a></span></span> arrows.		
		<span class="ncol">24</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c4_p25" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		वीराः कुञ्जरकुम्भेषु शायिनः शत्रुसायकैः ।<br />
		प्राबुध्यन्त सुरस्त्रीणां कुचकुम्भेषु तत्क्षणात् ॥ २५ ॥		
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		Brave soldiers<br />
		put to sleep by the shafts of their foes<br />
		upon pillows formed of elephants’ temples,<br />
		awoke the next moment<br />
		upon pillows formed of <span class="it">apsarases’</span> breasts.<span class="ref"><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c4_en2">2</a></sup></span>
		<span class="ncol">25</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c4_p26" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		ततः कम्पनरेन्द्रस्य भटैर्भुजबलोत्कटैः ।<br />
		पलायत पराभूता द्रमिडेन्द्रवरूथिनी ॥ २६ ॥		
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		King Kampa’s men,<br />
		running wild in their might,<br />
		put to flight<br />
		the forces of the <span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls13">Dramiḍa</a></span> lord.
		<span class="ncol">26</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c4_p27" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		हतानुकारिणः केचित् क्षितौ निपतितास्ततः ।<br />
		क्रोष्टुर्भयेन धावन्तः कर्णाटान् पर्यहासयन् ॥ २७ ॥		
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		Some dropped down to the ground<br />
		feigning death,<br />
		only to scramble up into a run<br />
		for fear of the jackals –<br />
		provoking the mirth of their <span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls23">Karṇāṭa</a></span> foes.
		<span class="ncol">27</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c4_p28" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		विक्षेप्तुं विस्मृतैश्चर्मफलकैर्निर्मितप्लवाः ।<br />
		मृषैव केचिदतरन् मृगतृष्णातरङ्गिणीः ॥ २८ ॥
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		Some seemed to be crossing illusory streams,<br />
		plying paddles formed of the leather shields<br />
		they still unconsciously clutched –<br />
		in vain.
		<span class="ncol">28</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c4_p29" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		अथ तस्य पुरीमेव नीत्वा शिबिरतां नृपः ।<br />
		अचलं राजगम्भीरमरुन्ध द्विषदाश्रितम् ॥ २९ ॥		
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		Finally King Kampa,<br />
		using <span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls8">Campa’s</a></span> city as his camp,<br />
		laid siege to the Rājagambhīra mountain<br />
		where hid his foe.		
		<span class="ncol">29</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c4_p30" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		प्रवाताभिमुखाधूतैः पताकापाणिपल्लवैः ।<br />
		आरोहणाय राजेन्द्रमाजुहावेव भूधरः ॥ ३० ॥		
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		The mountain seemed to beckon the King to ascend,<br />
		motioning him forward<br />
		with frail hands<br />
		formed of flags fluttering in the wind.
		<span class="ncol">30</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c4_p31" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		अथ प्रववृते युद्धं सेनयोरुभयोरपि ।<br />
		पतदुत्पतदस्त्रांशुज्वलितोर्वीनभःस्थलम् ॥ ३१ ॥
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		Thus was battle joined between the two armies,<br />
		setting aglow both land and sky as<br />
		flying up<br />
		flying down<br />
		missile glanced against missile.
		<span class="ncol">31</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c4_p32" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		निर्जगाम निजागाराच्चम्पक्ष्मापोऽपि कोपनः ।<br />
		कृपाणपाणिर्वल्मीकाज्जिह्वाल इव जिह्मगः ॥ ३२ ॥		
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		The apoplectic Prince <span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls8">Campa</a></span><br />
		darted out of his den,<br />
		standing sword in hand,<br />
		like a snake out of an anthill,<br />
		tongue flicking.
		<span class="ncol">32</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c4_p33" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		अहंपूर्विकया वीरेष्वभितो युद्धकाङ्क्षिषु ।<br />
		प्रत्यग्रहीन्महीपालश्चम्पं सिंह इव द्विपम् ॥ ३३ ॥		
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		As battle-thirsty warriors all around him<br />
		jostled with each other<br />
		to deal the first blow,<br />
		the King sprung upon <span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls8">Campa</a></span><br />
		as a lion upon an elephant.
		<span class="ncol">33</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c4_p34" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		अथ वञ्चिततत्खड्गप्रहारः कम्पभूपतिः ।<br />
		अकरोदसिना चम्पममरेन्द्रपुरातिथिम् ॥ ३४ ॥		
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		At that moment King Kampa,<br />
		dodging <span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls8">Campa’s</a></span> blow,<br />
		made him<br />
		with a stroke of his own sword<br />
		a guest of Indra in heaven.		
		<span class="ncol">34</span>
	</p>
</div>

<div id="c4_p35" class="poem1">
	<p class="devpoem">
		इत्थं सङ्गरमूर्ध्नि चम्पनृपतिं नीत्वा कथाशेषतां<br />
		श्रीमान् कम्पनृपेश्वरो जनयितुः सम्प्राप्तवान् शासनम् ।<br />
		काञ्चीन्यस्तजयप्रशस्तिरमिथःसङ्कीर्णवर्णाश्रमं<br />
		नीत्या नित्यनिरत्ययर्द्धिरशिषत् तुण्डीरभूमण्डलम् ॥ ३५ ॥ शार्दूलविक्रीडितम्		
	</p>
	<p class="enpoem">
		Thus in the thick of the battle the glorious monarch Kampa,<br />
		carrying out his father’s orders,<br />
		relegated <span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls8">Campa</a></span> to the realm of memory.<br />
		Issuing a proclamation of victory in <span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls21">Kāñcī</a></span><br />
		he governed the <span class="gls"><a epub:type="noteref" href="glossary.xhtml#gls48">Tuṇḍīra</a></span> land,<br />
		keeping <span class="it">varṇas</span> and <span class="it">āśramas</span> intact<span class="ref"><sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c4_en3">3</a></sup></span>,<br />
		the wisdom of his rule securing him<br />
		a prosperity permanent and perfect.
		<span class="ncol">35</span>
	</p>
</div>

	<aside epub:type="footnote" id="c4_en1">
		<p>Those killed fighting bravely go straight to heaven, breaking through the sun.</p>
	</aside>
	<aside epub:type="footnote" id="c4_en2">
		<p>The poetess is here playing on the word <span class="it">‘kumbha’</span> (an elephant's temple as well as a pitcher, and by extension a pitcher-shaped breast) to bring out how fast brave warriors arrive in heaven.</p>
	</aside>
	<aside epub:type="footnote" id="c4_en3">
		<p>Strictly maintaining the fourfold division of society into <span class="it">varṇas</span> and of each individual’s life into <span class="it">āśramas</span> was an important royal duty.</p>
	</aside>

</div>
</body>
</html>
