+++
title = "2012-11-12__8"

+++
[[Mohan K.V	2012-11-12, 19:50:02 [Source](https://groups.google.com/g/sadaswada/c/el3bOFvRmEY)]]



**सदास्वाद**  

**  
**

चरणार्धरुद्धवसुधः  

  

(caraṇa-ardha-ruddha-vasudhaḥ)

  

MEANING:

> 
> > Literally, "foot-half-pressed down-earth" , meaning "(He who is) > pressing down on the earth with half his foot" or more simply, > "standing tip-toed".
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 

CONTEXT:

> 
> > This phrase is from a verse in the Amaruśatakaṃ, one of the finest > collections of love poetry in Sanskrit. The origin of this work > (anthology?) is steeped in legend and the mists of time; attributions > range from a unknown King Amaru of Kashmir, toŚaṃkarācārya in a > daredevil body-swapping adventure. A wide variety of themes are seen > -- longing to lovers' quarrels to separation; devious schemes designed > at lightning speed to stop the house parrot from squeaking out the > night's secrets in front of parents, to a new vision of Advaita, where > only She appears wherever the poor Mumukṣu looks; the lady's anger > expressed at one time with excess courtesy, and in another by kicking > away her beloved grovelling at her feet, with a subtle hint that the > former was more hurtful. In all, a thoroughly enjoyable and > revisitable masterpiece. >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > In what is in our opinion the most beautifully meditative verse of the > collection, a traveler's tiny gesture is captured in a > picture-in-words:
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > देशैरन्तरिता शतैश्च सरितामुर्वीभृतां काननैः >
> 
> > 
> > यत्नेनापि न याति लोचनपथं कान्तेति जानन्नपि । >
> 
> > 
> > उद्ग्रीव**श्चरणार्धरुद्धवसुधः**कृत्वाश्रुपूर्णां दृशं >
> 
> > 
> > तामाशां पथिकस्तथापि किमपि ध्यायंश्चिरं वीक्षते ॥ >
> 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > deśair-antaritā śataiś-ca saritām urvībhṛtāṃ kānanaiḥ >
> 
> > 
> > yatnenāpi na yāti locana-pathaṃ kānteti jānann-api \| >
> 
> > 
> > udgrīvaś**caraṇārdha-ruddha-vasudhaḥ**kṛtvāśrupūrṇāṃ dṛśaṃ >
> 
> > 
> > tāmāśāṃ pathikastathāpi kimapi dhyāyaṃściraṃ vīkṣate \|\| >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > (śārdūlavikrīḍita, 19 syllables per line)
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > "Hundreds of kingdoms and forests and rivers and mighty mountains > separate them,
> > 
> > 
> > there's no way he can possibly see her -- even though he knows this,
> > 
> > 
> > Neck upturned, tip-toed, with teary eyes,
> > 
> > 
> > the traveler thoughtfully gazes homeward." >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > In some of the best writtenśārdūlavikrīḍitas, the first two lines set > the context, and the third line (and sometimes the fourth) contain the > soul of the poem. Here, the first two lines are nice and do their job, > but the third one, especially today's phrase, is what pushes this into > the realm of genius. Consider just that phrase.Thesamāsa, of course, > transmits several more hints than can be captured in one paragraph, > let alone by the bald phrase "tip-toed" -- the incongruity (intrepid > or foolish or timorous?) of pressing down on the mighty earth with not > even the whole of his foot; of pressing downwith his > footon*vasudhā*, "the bearer of riches" and not earth by some other > denotation like bhūmi or pṛthvī -- perhaps signifying a conflict in > himself for having left his beloved for the sake of mere money (the > main purpose of travel in these poems was to earn money); '*ruddha*' > -- he didn't raise himself up, he*pushed the earth down*, an act > which we guess was easier than supporting up the weight he bears in > his heart. Need we say more? :-) >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > The image sets our mind racing in multiple directions. In just that > tiny detail of a tip-toe, that conscious, incremental, quivering > tip-toe, is contained the audacity of hope, the irrationality that is > the very essence of the human condition, the vulnerability that is the > soul of love and longing, and a gentle reminder of our stark > loneliness in a pitilessly indifferent universe.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 

A THOUGHT FOR TODAY:

> 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > नलिनीदलगतजलमतितरलं  
> तद्वज्जीवितमतिशयचपलम् ।  
> विद्धि व्याध्यभिमानग्रस्तं  
> लोकं शोकहतं च समस्तम् ॥ >
> 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > nalinī-dala-gata-jalam atitaralaṃ >
> 
> > 
> > tadvaj-jīvitam atiśaya-capalam \| >
> 
> > 
> > viddhi vyādhyabhimāna-grastaṃ >
> 
> > 
> > lokaṃ śoka-hataṃ ca samastam \|\| >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > Surely one of the most distinctive features of love, one that is > celebrated, despised or at least hinted at in every discourse about > it, is its ability to give life a sense of purpose and meaning. Alas, > that doesn't appear to last. Here is the ever reliableŚaṃkara, > keepin' it real in his celebrated Bhaja Govindaṃ:
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > "Life is as fickle as a drop of water on a lotus leaf; know that this > entire world is suffering from the disease of conceit." >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > The most perceptive audience for this wisdom has to be the multitude > ofinvisible counterparties in the Amaru verses involving rejection! >
> 
> > 
> > 
> > 

