+++
title = "2012-12-28__14"

+++
[[Mohan K.V	2012-12-28, 05:08:59 [Source](https://groups.google.com/g/sadaswada/c/ZxtKsrwLz2Y)]]



**सदास्वाद**

  

स्मर्तव्योऽस्मि कथान्तरेषु भवता -- स्वात्माऽपि विस्मर्यते?  

  

(smartavyo'smi kathāntareṣu bhavatā -- svātmā'pi vismaryate?)

  

MEANING:

> 
> > This Śārdūlavikrīḍita line has two dialogues embedded in it, and can > be translated as "Remember me, won't you? -- Can I forget my own > self?". The first half is spoken by Cārudatta bidding goodbye, and the > second is the reply by Āryaka. Many distinctly idiomatic features of > both the language and etiquette of the times are seen: the use of the > passive voice and 'bhavat' even by the nobleman doing the favor; > 'kathāntareṣu' is literally 'in the middle of words', but it can't be > translated to English -- its net effect is to reduce the intensity of > the 'smartavya' demand, hinting thatCārudatta doesn't want to make > even this trivial request binding; in the reply, the use 'api' as a > question-mark; the essence of considering his very self indebted > toCārudatta for his timely help -- all this in 19 syllables!
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 

CONTEXT:

> 
> > 
> > Today's phrase is taken from the play Mṛcchakatika written byŚūdraka. > The play is a dense braid of several parallel threads, and is > distinctly 'cosmopolitan' and 'worldly' compared to other Sanskrit > plays. You probably have guessed the next sentence by now -- we know > virtually nothing of the author. At most, we can glean that he > probably lived sometime 1500 to 2000 years ago, and knew the city of > Ujjain well. And yet, in spite of the yawing gap of a couple of > *millennia*, one could pick up a literal translation today and relate > to the characters almost instantly, with no assumed knowledge > whatsoever!
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > The play is a dense braid of several narrative threads: the love > between the virtuous, newly poor merchantCārudatta and the equally > virtuous courtesan Vasantasenā; the misrule of the wretch Pālaka; the > excesses ofPālaka's brother-in-law, Saṃsthānaka; an attempt at a coup > by the prince-in-exile Āryaka; and ever-present microtones of love, > humour and large-heartedness among the minor characters.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > Several elements of the play jump out with their remarkable > originality. For example,Saṃsthānaka is possibly the first appearance > of a comic villain in Sanskrit drama. He's evil alright, but there's > not a scene where he doesn't make a fool of himself. The entire play > is suffused with humour at all levels: right at the words,Saṃsthānaka > has a kind of lisp and pronounces every 's' with 'sh' -- a simple > quirk that causes much hilarity at several places. He moves with an > entourage that doesn't miss a single opportunity to break out into > irrelevant, profound verse. There's a character who rues about his > wife forcing him to fund a very expensive ritual -- whose aim is to > get her a good husband in her *next* life!
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > Śūdraka is a genius at versifying simple, spoken Sanskrit. Almost all > his verses can be read in one go just as it's spoken, with no need to > rearrange words in our head. This great quality of Anvaya-śuddhi is > not possessed even by Kalidasa. There is even a *nyāya* (aphorism) > called the 'kaścitkāntānyāya'. Kalidasa begins his Meghaduta with the > words 'kaścit kāntā--' and there appears to be gender mismatch in the > words. Only after reading the entire verse does it becomes clear > whokaścit refers to. The aphorism can be made to mean a call for > patience and to hear the speaker out, or as a poke at the verbal > gymnastics one needs to do in Sanskrit :-) >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > Śūdraka's genius extends to writing multiple *dialogues* in the same > verse. He originated this innovation, which has been carried forward > to great heights by later poets like Amaru and Lilasuka. Today's verse > is an example. Near the end of the seventh act, Cārudatta has just > done Āryaka a great favor by cutting his fetters and giving him his > own cart to escape in, with nary a second thought.Āryaka finally has > his freedom and thanksCārudatta profusely. It's time for him to get > away, before the guards get close. What follows is a very courteous > tete-a-tete goodbye: >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > क्षेमेण व्रज बान्धवान् -- ननु मया लब्धो भवान् बान्धवः
> > 
> > 
> > **स्मर्तव्योऽस्मि कथान्तरेषु भवता -- स्वात्माऽपि विस्मर्यते? ।** >
> 
> > 
> > त्वां रक्षन्तु पथि प्रयान्तममराः -- संरक्षितोऽहं त्वया
> > 
> > 
> > स्वैर्भाग्यैः परिरक्षितोऽसि -- ननु हे तत्रापि हेतुर्भवान्! ॥ >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > kṣemeṇa vraja bāndhavān -- nanu mayā labdho bhavān bāndhavaḥ
> > 
> > 
> > **smartavyo'smi kathāntareṣu bhavatā -- svātmā'pi vismaryate? \|** >
> 
> > 
> > tvāṃ rakṣantu pathi prayāntamamarāḥ -- saṃrakṣito'haṃ tvayā
> > 
> > 
> > svairbhāgyaiḥ parirakṣito'si -- nanu he tatrāpi heturbhavān! \|\| >
> 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > "Go safely to your well-wishers" -- "I have already found you, my > greatest well wisher!" >
> 
> > 
> > **"Remember me, won't you" -- "Can I forget my own self?"** >
> 
> > 
> > "May the Gods safeguard you on your path" -- "I've been safeguarded by > *you*" (You are a god yourself/other gods are irrelevant)
> > 
> > 
> > "Your own fortune saved you, dear friend" -- "And *you* were its > chosen instrument" (I respect you more than some invisible fortune) >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > Eight dialogues, of the highest pedigree of classical etiquette with > multiple overtones, all set tightly in metre and with no need for > rearrangement! >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 

A THOUGHT FOR TODAY:

> 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > For all its humour and classical etiquette, the play never once lets > go of its firm grasp of reality. This is not a bunch of simple-minded > men making a farce -- the characters are very aware of the world they > inhabit. In what appears to be a faint (pre-?)echo of the Cassandra > effect, a judge in the play makes a sharp observation of how he > *should* behave -- and yet, is helpless to do so: >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > शास्त्रज्ञः कपटानुसारकुशलो वक्ता न च क्रोधनः >
> 
> > 
> > तुल्यो मित्र-पर-स्वकेषु चरितं दृष्ट्वैव दत्तोत्तरः । >
> 
> > 
> > क्लीबान्पालयिता शठान्व्यथयिता धर्म्यो न लोभान्वितः
> > 
> > 
> > द्वार्भावे परतत्त्वबद्धहृदयः राज्ञश्च कोपापहः ॥ >
> 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> >  style="font-family:arial,sans-serif;line-height:19px;font-size:13px"> >
> 
> > 
> > 
> > śāstrajñaḥ kapaṭānusāra-kuśalo vaktā na ca krodhanaḥ >
> 
> > 
> > tulyo mitra-para-svakeṣu caritaṃ dṛṣṭvaiva dattottaraḥ \| >
> 
> > 
> > klībān pālayitā śaṭhān vyathayitā dharmyo na lobhānvitaḥ
> > 
> > 
> > dvār-bhāve para-tattva-baddha-hṛdayaḥ rājñaśca kopāpahaḥ \|\| >
> 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> >  style="font-family:arial,sans-serif;line-height:19px;font-size:13px"> >
>   
> > 
> > 
> > "Learned; skilled in identifying deception; a sensitive orator, and > yet not prone to excess emotion; equal to friend, foe or even self; > passing judgment only after a careful examination; defending the weak > and confounding the devious; right-minded and selfless; at times of > doubt, always having the best intentions of others in mind; and yet, > with all this, keep away from arousing the ruler's anger." >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > This was rare, even in the times of the playwright -- but we have a > modern example in the person of the Hon'ble Justice H. R. Khanna, > whose lonely yet firm "appeal to the intelligence of a future > day"satisfied every requirement except the last, andstands > resplendent in a dark, dark time. >
> 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 

  

