+++
title = "2012-10-23__Romanthaḥ - 1"

+++
[[Mohan K.V	2012-10-23, 23:02:03 [Source](https://groups.google.com/g/sadaswada/c/rGTEIIOHtsc)]]



**सदास्वादरोमन्थः**

**  
**

> Dear reader,
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > Our sincere thanks for your interest in our humble endeavor; our > mailing list has grown to nearly 50 members in the short space of a > month, and we're overjoyed at this response. We thought this would be > a good time to share some of the feedback, corrigenda and suggestions > we've received.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > Śatāvadhāni Dr. R. Ganesh, a sahṛdaya-suhṛd-ratna to whom we are > indebted in more ways than we can recount here, sends his regards and > appreciation, in particular for edition #2 (Bhartṛhari's hungry lion > verse) and #4 (The parrot and Indra). He recounts several more subtle > features of the hungry lion verse that make it a refined piece of art, > no less: the repeated use of the single samuccayārthaka (conjunctive) > word "api" six times, 'building a case' as it were; the suggestion > behind the sounds like agr"E"saraḥ k"E"sarī, with the long 'E' in > consonance with the unified majesty of the lion of the 3rd line, all > the schools of sāhityaśāstra (guṇa, rīti, alaṃkāra, dhvani, vakrokti > and aucitya) coming one after the other to enhance the Rasa. >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > P.K.Ramakrishnan comments on the 'Thought for today' of the second > edition: we had written, >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > kiṃ vāsasā-iti-atra vicāraṇīyam
> > 
> > 
> > vāsaḥ pradhānaṃ khalu yogyatāyai \|
> > 
> > 
> > pītāmbaraṃ vīkṣya dadau svakanyām
> > 
> > 
> > digambaraṃ vīkṣya viṣaṃ samudraḥ >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > He notes that the last line might better read as, "carmāmbaraṃ vīkṣya > viṣaṃ samudraḥ". The contrast between wearing a hide and wearing silk > is more apt than the contrast between being naked and wearing silk; > the former is more in the same 'category'. We thank Mr. Ramakrishnan > for this suggestion, and welcome any such thoughts from him and you > all. Please email us at [kvm....@gmail.com]() and > [shree...@gmail.com]() >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 

A THOUGHT FOR TODAY:

  

> 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > दातुं परोपकृतिनिर्भरचित्तवृत्तेः
> > 
> > 
> > आसन्नदूरगणना नहि संश्रितेषु । >
> 
> > 
> > भानुर्विकासयति हन्त सरोजखण्डं >
> 
> > 
> > पाणिस्थपङ्कजसमं भुवनान्तरेषु ॥ >
> 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > dātuṃ paropakṛti-nirbhara-cittavṛtteḥ
> > 
> > 
> > āsanna-dūra-gaṇanā nahi saṃśriteṣu \| >
> 
> > 
> > bhānurvikāsayati hanta sarojakhaṇḍaṃ >
> 
> > 
> > pāṇisthapaṅkajasamaṃ bhuvanāntareṣu \|\| >
> 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > "For those bent on helping others, distance is no concern: the sun, > though sitting worlds apart,makes the lotus bloom as if by his own > hand!" >
> 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 

