+++
title = "2013-01-25__18"

+++
[[Mohan K.V	2013-01-25, 21:56:28 [Source](https://groups.google.com/g/sadaswada/c/SWFPAAQucpM)]]



**सदास्वाद**

  

धन्या सा स्त्री यां तथा वेत्ति भर्ता /भर्तृस्नेहात् सा हि दग्धाऽप्यदग्धा

  

(dhanyā sā strī yāṃ tathā vetti bhartā /bhartṛ-snehāt sā hi dagdhā'pyadagdhā)

  

MEANING:

> 
> > "A lady whose husband knows her so well is indeed fortunate -- because > of his love, she lives on even though she's passed". While writing > verses with long compounds is a challenge, it's as hard to write > verses with short words. No word above is longer than 2 syllables! > Also, apun can operate in the second part, because 'sneha' both means > 'love' and 'balm'. 'dagdhā' literally means 'burnt', which has a > connotation in the context.
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 

CONTEXT:

> 
> > 
> > Today's phrase is taken from the play Svapna-vāsavadattaof > Bhāsa.Bhāsa is among the earliest of Sanskrit playwrights, and wrote > approximately 2000 years ago, predating Kālidāsa. He is an example of > the counterintuitive observation that in ancient Indian literature, > the earliest writers are often the best. As usual, very little is > known aboutBhāsa -- but this time, we go even further in our > ignorance (a feat we'd never thought possible): in very large swathes > of the Northern parts of the country, till the turn of the 20th > century *all works of**Bhāsa were lost*! He was known only via > references and partial quotations by literary critics through the > ages. It was only in 1912 that his plays were discovered in a > palm-leaf manuscript in Kerala. There is much debate on whether these > plays really belong toBhāsa, but for our purposes that is > peripheral.Coincidentally, Cāṇakya's Arthaśāstra, a treatise that > when discovered completely altered conceptions of advanced > administration in ancient India, suffered a similar fate, and was > unknown till it was discovered in Mysore in a similar fashion in 1904. > Why, Emperor Aśoka himself, whose symbols today adorn India's national > flag and emblem, had slipped out of public consciousness for more than > a millennium!
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > Most ofBhāsa's work draws from the three epic streams: the Rāmāyaṇa, > the Mahābharata and the Bṛhatkathā. His usual style is to take an > incident from these epic streams, modify the events to bring out the > mood he wants to portray and adapt it to the stage. > TheSvapna-vāsavadatta is similar, telling a story centered around the > emotions of Vāsavadattā, the dear queenof Udayana, the king of Vatsa. > A whimsical comparative note may help setBhāsa's style in the > context.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > Kālidāsa is like the James Bond of Sanskrit literature. There's a > certain style, a certain panache, an unefforted genius that is > apparent in him. He is most decorous, never utters even a word that's > inappropriate, and in any given situation, not just what he says, even > what he doesn't say carries a lot of meaning. In essence, he's a kind > of 'complete man'.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > In contrast, Bāṇa is like Arnold Schwarzenegger. He is known for one > thing -- his powerful, complex, pun-filled, ornate prose, like the > latter is for his incredible physique. He gives great joy to those who > have a taste for appreciating that one thing, but it's impossible to > expect him to deliver on any other front, and a great bonus surprise > when does.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > Bhartṛhari is the Angry Young Man. Everything he says -- be it > propounding an all-or-nothing philosophy or the joys of love or (a few > verses later) his utter disgust at the cavortations of this > not-yet-dead heap of meat and bones -- is marked by great passion, an > extreme conviction and force of expression. Irrespective of whether > one agrees with him or not, one gets drawn in by just the magnetic > certainty of the speaker. Probably based on this attraction is the > adage, "The World makes way for a man who knows where he's going".
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > Coming finally to our playwright after this Hollywood Walk of Fame > tour,Bhāsa is the quintessential Nice Guy. His plays are marked by a > certain culturedness, a deep respect for emotions and mildness of > touch. This mildness and civilizedness allows a breathing space for > the smallest of thoughts and gestures of his characters. Today's > phrase appears in Act 1, Verse 15 of theSvapna-vāsavadatta play. The > good and loyal minister Yaugandharāyaṇa has convinced Queen > Vāsavadattāthat King Udayana is too much in love with her to act > decisively for the good of the kingdom (one of those necessary actions > was to form a matrimonial alliance with a neighboring rival kingdom -- > but poorVāsavadattādoesn't know this particular detail). He's made > her agree to a plan where she and himself appear to perish in a fire, > but instead escape away in disguise. The plan has worked, and they are > both in anāśrama, when a young monk from Avanti comes with news of > Udayana. The poor king is plunged in grief and despair, he says, far > more than what anyone anticipated, and in a manner certainly > uncharacteristic of those times of multiple wives and harems.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > The monk, however, adds this:
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > नैवेदानीं तादृशाश्चक्रवाकाः >
> 
> > 
> > नैवाप्यन्ये स्त्रीविशेषैर्वियुक्ताः । >
> 
> > 
> > **धन्या सा स्त्री यां तथा वेत्ति भर्ता** >
> 
> > 
> > **भर्तृस्नेहात् सा हि दग्धाऽप्यदग्धा ॥** >
> 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > naivedānīṃ tādṛśāś cakravākāḥ >
> 
> > 
> > naivāpyanye strī-viśeṣair viyuktāḥ \| >
> 
> > 
> > **dhanyā sā strī yāṃ tathā vetti bhartā** >
> 
> > 
> > **bhartṛ-snehāt sā hi dagdhā'pyadagdhā \|\|** >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > (11 syllables per line,śālinī metre) >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > "Not even thecakravāka birds are like this,
> > 
> > 
> > nor anyone else bereaved of their dear ones.
> > 
> > A lady whose husband knows her so well is indeed fortunate --
> > 
> > 
> > because of his love, she lives on even though she's passed" >
> 
> > 
> > (It's a poetic convention thatcakravāka birds form lifelong pairs, > and that they cannot bear to be separated from their partner) >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > Imagine all that's going throughVāsavadattā's mind just before she > heard this. From the very beginning, guilt that she's agreed to lie to > her dearest lover; constantly wondering whether she can or should do > anything, even as the calming faith inYaugandharāyaṇa valiantly tries > to be a counterpoint to her fears; the heavy burden of living a lie, a > fresh one at that; and an 'imp of the perverse' that's constantly > tugging at her to reveal all to anyone in earshot and throw away this > burden of secret! At a more superficial level, encountering > difficulties of the ordinary world that she'd never imagined as a > princess and queen, the physical discomfort making her mental > conversations all the more harder to tame.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > And now, this young monk comes with news of Udayana's sorrow! How > heartbroken she must have been, to hear that her actions had caused > her dearest soulmate such intense sorrow! She'd have guessed he would > have been sad, but it's always a surprise when we experience in real > time what we had only abstractly thought about. The voices that urge > her to break the secret and throw it all away surely would have grown > louder. Shouting "This is it! I can't take this anymore! All this is a > lie! Tell the king I'm alive!" seems like a very easy solution to all > her problems, and no one can blame her afterwards (or at least, no one > would dare to). At the same time, somewhere in the background there > would have emerged a tiny sliver of happiness -- or is it pride, or > contentment? -- thatUdayana loved her so much. Is this not one of the > highest points of the experience of love? As a modern writer makes his > messenger instruct a thick-headed hero about the need to constantly > re-affirm love,"She wants to know *if* you love her, that’s all > anyone wants from anyone else: not love itself but *knowledge that > love is there*, like new batteries in the flashlight in the emergency > kit in the cupboard." >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > Often when we're faced with such a bevy of thoughts, we genuinely > don't know what to think. It's here that someone else's words helps us > anchor to one thought-stream, and it suddenly appears more 'important' > than all others. This is exactly what the monk'slater words do. They > drawVāsavadattā's attention back to the positives, back to how good a > person Udayana is, how much he loves her, and so, how important it is > that she must now act for his good. His words succeed, > andVāsavadattāholds herself back from saying anything.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > This is the genius ofBhāsa: what was actually uttered was a > relatively simple verse, but the context magnifies its importance to > unimaginable proportions. And note well that the most important, most > praiseworthy and most deeply meaningful action in this entire sequence > wasVāsavadattā's: doing nothing! :-) >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 

A THOUGHT FOR TODAY:

> 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > Like tomatoes, potatoes and chillies, tobacco came to India with the > arrival of the Europeans. But despite its late entry, some Sanskrit > poet seems to have managed to write a ditty, expressing the Indian > pantheon's poetic flexibility and state-of-the-art tastes:
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > बिडौजाः पुरा पृष्टवान्पद्मयोनिं >
> 
> > 
> > धरित्रीतले सारभूतं किमस्ति । >
> 
> > 
> > चतुर्भिर्मुखैरित्यवोचद्विरिञ्चिः
> > 
> > 
> > तमाखुस्तमाखुस्तमाखुस्तमाखुः ॥ >
> 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > biḍaujāḥ purā pṛṣṭavān padmayoniṃ >
> 
> > 
> > dharitrī-tale sāra-bhūtaṃ kim asti \| >
> 
> > 
> > caturbhir mukhair ity-avocad viriñciḥ
> > 
> > 
> > tamākhus tamākhus tamākhus tamākhuḥ \|\| >
> 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > "Indra once asked Brahma, what is the most excellent thing in the > world? Brahma spoke with all his 4 mouths, 'Tobacco, tobacco, tobacco > and tobacco!'". Just repeating 4 words in metre is a feat in itself, > but to do it in a way that's not just meaningful but also apt and > funny is truly great stuff!
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > It's been a while since we ran our last contest, so we'll start a new > one. The 'thought for the day' for this edition and the next 2 > editions will be linked. Your task will be to figure out what the link > is!
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 

  

