+++
title = "2013-01-30__19"

+++
[[Mohan K.V	2013-01-30, 07:27:54 [Source](https://groups.google.com/g/sadaswada/c/Hw1uDGfmufs)]]



**सदास्वाद**  

  

श्री-निर्मिति-प्राप्त-घुण-क्षतैक- / -वर्णोपमा-वाच्यम् अलं ममार्ज

  

(śrī-nirmiti-prāpta-ghuṇa-kṣataika- / -varṇopamā-vācyam alaṃ mamārja)

  

MEANING:

> 
> > "\[Brahma\] washed himself clean of the allegation that his creation > ofŚrī (Lakṣmī) was a fluke." The original carries very many more > reverberations: first, what we've glossed as 'fluke' is actually > 'ghuṇa-kṣataika-varṇa', a famousnyāya (aphorism) that talks of a > particular form of coincidence. 'ghuṇa' means termite, 'kṣata' cut, > and 'varṇa' letter. When termites eat into wood, sometimes their cuts > appear to be forming a letter of the alphabet. The termites have no > clue of this, of course. 'Ghuṇa-kṣataika-varṇa nyāya' or 'ghuṇākṣara > nyāya' warns us against attributing intent to just random chance. By > using just 1 samāsa, the poet makes us imagine that when Lakṣmī was > born, people were so amazed by her beauty that they couldn't believe > that Brahma could actually create something somarvelous, and so > agreed to call it a lucky fluke. At last, he's cleansed himself of > this ignominy. How? Read on!
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 

CONTEXT:

> 
> > 
> > Today's phrase is taken from theŚiśupālavadhamof Māgha.Māgha was > born in Bhinmal of modern-day Rajasthan, a city of great learning > which was also the birthplace of Brahmagupta, the famous > mathematician. He lived sometime around 1300 years ago, and his only > surviving work is theŚiśupālavadham, which is one of the five > canonicalmahākāvyas and is based on the incident in the Mahabharata > of Krishna killing the villainousŚiśupāla. It is clear that > theŚiśupālavadham was written with an intention to surpass Bhāravi's > Kirātārjunīya almost at a microscopic level of comparison.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > Māgha is a perfect example of the fickle nature of even literary fame: > he appears to have been an absolute favorite of the old-school > vidvat-kavis, and was even considered by some to carry the best > elements of his predecessors Kālidasa, Bhāravi and Dandi ("*upamā > kālidāsasya bhāraverartha gauravam / daṇḍinaḥ padalālityaṃ māghe santi > trayoguṇāḥ*"). However, in recent times, with a high value placed on > emotive content, appreciation ofMāgha's art has waned, and he is > variously accused of being 'artificial', 'overly ornate', 'sacrificing > narrative for the sake of needless description', and appearing more > prominent than his own characters in his work. >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > All these accusations carry a grain of the truth, some even a bushel; > but as with most disappointments, at their root is a mismatch of > expectations.Māgha is a poet who appeals to the intellect far more > than he does to the heart. Further, his work is best read as small, > independent parts, not an overarching whole with a masterful design. > Both these features are exemplified in canto 19, with its*citrakāvya > (*constrained writing).If you've ever solved a crossword, rebus or > other word puzzle and enjoyed a little in-joke, or better > still,*created*a word puzzle, palindrome or acrostic, you've touched > upon a path on which Sanskrit poets likeMāgha have trodden very far. >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > Agreat war is raging between Krishna's andŚiśupāla'sarmies. The > troops were arranging themselves into many intricate formations to > fight, and as if to reflect this the poet begins to use verses which > have amazing patterns and formations themselves (of course, he loves > his own poetry more, so he says the reverse with a cute > self-reference: "The armies arranged themselves like an epic poem's > verse patterns": "*viṣamaṃ sarvatobhadra-cakra-gomūtrikādibhiḥ / > ślokair iva mahā-kāvyaṃ vyūhais tad abhavad balaṃ*"). The poet says > this in verse 27:
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > sakāra-nānāra-kāsa-kāya-sādada-sāyakā  
> rasāhavā vāhasāra-nāda-vādada-vādanā. >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > "The army, whose arrows (sāyakā) were the destroyers (sādada) of the > movements and troops (kāsa-kāya) of their various striving enemies > (sakāra-nānā-ara), and which carried triumphal war music > (vāhasāra-nāda) instruments (vādanā), relished the battle > (rasa-āhavā)". This seems like an average verse -- a few rare words > (kāsa, sādada) that need a dictionary lookup perhaps, but nothing very > untoward. But this verse has an incredible property called > *sarvatobhadra*, "good from all sides". It's a super-palindrome that > reads the same in any direction -- left, right, top or bottom! >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | > |-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----| > | sa  | kā  | ra  | nā  | nā  | ra  | kā  | sa  | > | kā  | ya  | sā  | da  | da  | sā  | ya  | kā  | > | ra  | sā  | ha  | vā  | vā  | ha  | sā  | ra  | > | nā  | da  | vā  | da  | da  | vā  | da  | nā  | >
>          (mirrored) >
> 
> > 
> > |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | > |-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----| > | nā  | da  | vā  | da  | da  | vā  | da  | nā  | > | ra  | sā  | ha  | vā  | vā  | ha  | sā  | ra  | > | kā  | ya  | sā  | da  | da  | sā  | ya  | kā  | > | sa  | kā  | ra  | nā  | nā  | ra  | kā  | sa  | >
>   
> > 
> > 
> > This verse has been referred to in the famous puzzlemaster Martin > Gardner's Mathematical Circus and several other recreational > mathematics texts. Of course this is not the only *sarvatobhadra* > verse --Bhāravi's Kirātārjunīya's itself has one, and there are > countless more written by later poets. But the glory ofMāgha was that > he openly took the challenge of excellingBhāravi, and, in the opinion > of the old school, succeeded. His*citrakāvya* canto, for example, is > bigger and has more varieties thanBhāravi's does.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > Now let's step back for a bit. There is no doubt whatsoever that this > is a feat of incredible linguistic genius. In the same vein, we also > see that it does little to actually describe the war. Its highlight is > not the war, it's the verse's own innate property -- as long as we > keep this in mind, it affords great enjoyment.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > Let's take an example of a different genre of verse to close out this > point. Further in the same canto, in verse 117 the poet says,
> > 
> > 
> > *  
> * >
> 
> > 
> > dvidhā tridhā caturdhā vā tam ekam api śatravaḥ \| >
> 
> > 
> > paśyantaḥ spardhayā sadyaḥ svayaṃ pañcatvam āyayuḥ \|\|
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > "\[By his magic\], Krishna's enemies began seeing his one form as > twos, threes and fours. As if to compete with him, they > attained*pañcatva* (literally, 'five-ness', meaning the state of > being the five elements, meaning they died)". This is a hilarious > verse, inventing a well-fitting pun onto*pañcatva.* We can be sure > it's brought chuckles to its readers for the last 1200 years. As long > as we don't expect it to generate in us the terror of war, we're fine > :-) >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > Coming back to our present topic, today's phrase comes from canto 3, > which is mostly a description of the city of Dvārakā. Krishna has > decided that the best course of action is to take his army with him to > Yudhiṣṭhira's capital of Indraprastha, all prepared to fight the > villainŚiśupāla who is also expected to come there. As he sets out, > the poet describes the glories of the city. At one place, he writes,
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > cikraṃsayā kṛtrima-patri-paṅkteḥ kapota-pālīṣu niketanānām \| >
> 
> > 
> > mārjāram apyāyata-niścalāṅgaṃ yasyāṃ janaḥ kṛtrimam eva mene \|\| > 3.51
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > "On top of the buildings, there were aviaries with toy models of > birds. The models were so lifelike, that on one of the roofs, a cat > was bent down silently, waiting to attack. But the people who walked > past \[so used to fine sculpture\] assumed even the cat was a model!" >
> 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > Going further, we find today's phrase in a description of the city's > women's beauty in verse 58:
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > परस्परस्स्पर्धि-परार्ध्य-रूपाः >
> 
> > 
> > पौरस्त्रियो यत्र विधाय वेधाः । >
> 
> > 
> > **श्री-निर्मिति-प्राप्त-घुण-क्षतैक-** >
> 
> > 
> > **-वर्णोपमा-वाच्यम् अलं ममार्ज ॥** >
> 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > paras paras spardhi-parārdhya-rūpāḥ
> > 
> > 
> > paura-striyo yatra vidhāya vedhāḥ \| >
> 
> > 
> > śrī-nirmiti-prāpta-ghuṇa-kṣataika- >
> 
> > 
> > -varṇopamā-vācyam alaṃ mamārja \|\| >
> 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > (upajāti metre, 11 syllables per line)
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > "In which city, \[i.e InDvārakā\] the creator made so many beautiful > women competing among themselves with their good looks, thathe washed > himself clean of the allegation that his creation ofŚrī (Lakṣmī) was > a fluke." >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 'Ghuṇa-kṣataika-varṇa' or 'Ghuṇākṣara' refers to a famousnyāya > (aphorism) that talks of a particular form of coincidence where a > chance, unintentional action causes the creation of something very > profound. The poet here is saying that when Lakṣmī was born, people > were so amazed by her beauty that they couldn't believe that Brahma > could actually create something somarvelous, and so agreed to call it > a lucky fluke. Not just any fluke -- it's a fluke where Brahma, the > *creator of all worlds himself*, is likened to a dumb termite somehow > producing profoundly beautiful things without even knowing it! Poor > Brahma! Now, by creating Dvārakā's ladies, he's finally managed to > prove to his detractors that he knows a thing or two about beauty. > Note that there is no well-known story of Brahma being accused thus. > It's all in the poet's imagination, and with the remarkable brevity of > Sanskrit,*in this one phrase!* >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > (We have to add here though, for some reason Brahma seems to be > considered as not very smart in popular depictions anywhere. As > Douglas Adams begins his *Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy*: "In the > beginning the Universe was created. This has made a lot of people very > angry and has been widely regarded as a bad move." :-) ) >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > We will end today's edition with the next verse:
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > kṣuṇṇam yadantaḥkaraṇena vṛkṣāḥ phalanti kalpopapadāstadeva \|
> > 
> > 
> > adhyūṣuṣo yām abhavan janasya yāḥ sampadastāḥ manaso'pyagamyāḥ \|\| > 3.59 >
> 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > "There are supposedly these wish-giving trees somewhere, called > 'Kalpa' trees, which grant whatever one imagines under them \[With > utter disdain, as if he's saying, 'Well, I don't know why such > complicated contraptions need to exist'\]. The people who lived in > this city had glories *which couldn't even be imagined!*".
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > What use is a wish-giving tree, if one doesn't know what one wants?
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 

A THOUGHT FOR TODAY:

> 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > Like for most of us today, classical Sanskrit poets' most hated task > appears to have been to serve under a bad boss. Here a poet rues: 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > चित्तभू-वित्तभू-मत्त-भूपालकोपासनावासनायास-नानाभ्रमैः । >
> 
> > 
> > साधिता साधिता साधुता सा धुता किं तया चिन्तया चिन्तयामः शिवं ॥ >
> 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > cittabhū-vittabhū-matta-bhūpālakopāsanāvāsanāyāsa-nānābhramaiḥ \| >
> 
> > 
> > sādhitā sādhitā sādhutā sā dhutā kiṃ tayā cintayā cintayāmaḥ śivaṃ > \|\| >
> 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > "I spent all my time being tired of serving the whims of this local > ruler who was reeling under lust and pride*.* >
> 
> > 
> > The goodness that was cultivated with much pain is now all shaken off. > Sigh, of what use is worry now? Let's seek refuge inŚiva." >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > Remember, we're running a contest! The 'thought for the day' for > editions 18, 19 (this one) and 20 are all linked. Your task will be to > figure out what the link is!
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 

