+++
title = "2013-04-30__30"

+++
[[Mohan K.V	2013-04-30, 03:08:10 [Source](https://groups.google.com/g/sadaswada/c/qmwr6FMnuNY)]]



**सदास्वाद**  

  

एको गुणः खलु निहन्ति समस्त-दोषान्

  

(eko guṇaḥ khalu nihanti samasta-doṣān)

  

MEANING:

> 
> > "One good quality makes up for every fault" -- to write such simple, > intelligible lines in verse is extremely hard! This has all the best > qualities of a subhaṣita -- this line is the 'take-away', can stand > independently and expresses an interesting insight. The rest of the > verse presumably justifies this. How? Before you read on, try thinking > of what could fit in the past 3 lines :-) >
> 
> > 
> > 
> > 

CONTEXT:

> 
> > 
> > Today's phrase is taken from the Cāṇakya-nīti.Cāṇakya, also known as > Kauṭilya and Viṣṇugupta, was the famous founding father of the Mauryan > empire which united India for the first time in history about 2300 > years ago. Over time, his political acumen and intelligence have been > so celebrated that the very word 'Cāṇakya' is a synonym for an > extremely brilliant person.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > A relatively lesser-known fact is thatCāṇakya was pretty much > forgotten in all but name for the largest part for the last 1000 > years, and came to light as recently as 1905, whenRudrapatnam > Shamasastry, a scholar and librarian atthe Oriental Research > Institute at Mysore,discovered an ancient palm-leaf manuscript > written in the Tamil-like Grantha script. Over 4 years of meticulous > reconstruction yielded a workable copy, and 6 years of translation > efforts finally made the work known to the wider English-speaking > world. This is as much a testament to the industry ofShamasastry as > it is to the glory of the ascendant administration of Mysore at the > time. Starting from Diwan C. Rungacharlu in 1881, for almost an > unbroken magical spell of 60 years, the Kingdom of Mysore was in the > hands of some of the ablest administrators the land has ever known, > either before or after. It was Rungacharlu's successor, K. Seshadri > Iyer, who appointed the youngShamasastry as librarian after being > impressed by his scholarship. His work speaks for itself -- The > KingKrishnaraja Wadiyar IV once visited Germany and was invited to > address a meeting. The Maharaja was introduced to the guests as "His > Highness the Maharaja of Mysore". After his address, a German audience > member came up to him and asked, “Your Majesty, are you the Maharaja > of Mysore where lives Dr. Shamasastry, the discoverer of > Arthasastra?’’ The Maharaja was pleasantly surprised that Shamasastry > was so well known even in Germany!He felt proud of this great > scholar, and after his return called him and said, “In Mysore we are > the Maharaja and you are our subject, but in Germany, you are the > master and people recognize us by your name and fame!”
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > We leave the reader to reflect if such an appointment, or such genuine > pleasure at an appointee's success, is conceivable in government > today.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > In the literary space,Cāṇakya is credited with two works -- his > magnum opus Arthaśāstra, and a smaller work on Nīti. Our topic today > is the second work.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > As with many ancient works, the authorship of this one is hotly > disputed. The degree of dispute varies from some claiming that this > work is much later than Cāṇakya, and that it's simply coasting on his > name and fame, to some who claim that no one called 'Cāṇakya' ever > existed, and some collection of the floating mass of oral knowledge > was condensed into a work. We shall leave these considerations to > historians and focus on the work itself.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > The Cāṇakya-nīti, like a vast portion of Sanskrit literature, is not a > work of poetry. It could be called a collection of thoughts on > practical matters, and here a difficulty quite common in the study of > old works accosts us: *many* such thoughts, one might say even the > majority, do not apply to our society and world today. They are either > irrelevant, inapplicable, or sometimes plainly morally wrong by our > standards. How is one to react?
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > One reaction may be to judge them, and by extension the society that > produced them, poorly: "If these people really believed these utterly > wrong things, they must have been very backward and worthy of > contempt". To people who believe so, any good ideas in the work are > merely exceptions as long as there is a sufficient mass of 'wrong' > ideas at hand, which always is.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > A counter-reaction to this would be that this is comparing apples and > oranges. What if we compare Cāṇakya-nīti and its society to other > works and societies *of that time*? This leads to the familiar "When > my ancestors were pondering ethics of society, yours were prancing > naked in the forests" line of arguments.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > A third approach would be to explain by adding context. "Yes, this > work contains such-and-such seemingly wrong idea, but if you consult > these hundred other documents, you'll find that given all the other > things that existed then, this idea is not that wrong, not that > harmful, and in fact quite reasonable. After all, we accept so many > wrong things today, from horribly unequal money distribution to > electing criminals -- do you think we live in times of unbearable > inhumanity? Certainly not!". However, it must be admitted that this > approach has all the tedium and little of the joy of explaining a > pothole in the road by recourse to a study of geology, materials > science, civil engineering, urban planning and politics. >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > All the above approaches have *judgment of the work as a whole and > more* as one of their central aims. For our purposes, it is best to > adopt a fourth approach that differs here: Yes, there are many thorny > ideas here, but we shall choose to focus only on what gives us joy. Is > that 30% of the volume, which in our experience is typical of the very > best and most celebrated of works? Maybe 5%, or 1%? Whatever it is, it > is a number not worth getting agitated about. After all, there is an > entire ocean to explore, and every moment spent on ponderous judgment > is a moment not spent on discovering self-evidently beautiful things. > 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > With that, let's delve right in:
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > कोऽतिभारः समर्थानाम् किं दूरं बलशालिनाम् । >
> 
> > 
> > को विदेशः सुविद्यानां कः परः प्रियवादिनाम् ।3.13। >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > ko'tibhāraḥ samarthānām kiṃ dūraṃ balaśālinām \| >
> 
> > 
> > ko videśaḥ suvidyānāṃ kaḥ paraḥ priyavādinām \|3.13\| >
> 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > "What indeed is too heavy for the mighty? What distance is too far for > the strong? What is a foreign land to a learned man? Who is beyond the > power of praise?" >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > This is a famous subhaṣita, with the last line being the "punch". It > appears in many other places as well. Throughout this work, there are > echoes of Pancatantra, Bhartṛhari, and others -- it is a lifetime's > task to find out who influenced who.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > मूर्खा यत्र न पूज्यन्ते धान्यं यत्र सुसञ्चितम् । >
> 
> > 
> > दाम्पत्ये कलहो नास्ति तत्र श्रीः स्वयम् आगता ।3.21। >
> 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > mūrkhā yatra na pūjyante dhānyaṃ yatra susañcitam \| >
> 
> > 
> > dāmpatye kalaho nāsti tatra śrīḥ svayam āgatā \|3.21\| >
> 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > "Where fools don't hold power, where riches aren't squandered, and > where there isn't infighting among couples -- wealth makes its way > there by itself." >
> 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > We should be wary of reading too much wisdom, but one must admit that > this reveals an incredible concept in allegory. If only we take > 'couples' to mean 'those who have to stay together for whatever > reasons', this lays out a distinction between 'figure' and 'ground'. > In a piece of art, the part which the artist actually draws is the > 'figure'. The *back*groundof the piece, which includes what the > artist didn't draw explicitly, but which formed automatically, is the > 'ground'. This is a common theme in optical illusions.If a certain > minimum set of conditions is satisfied, human ingenuity left to itself > will take care of producing wealth. The 'figure' should not crowd out > the 'ground', and there must be a balance between the two. The > greatest economic learning from the 20th century has been that having > too many constraints and expecting too much discipline is not just > ineffective, it is destructive.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > कः कालः कानि मित्राणि को देशः कौ व्ययागमौ । >
> 
> > 
> > कश्चाहं का च मे शक्तिः इति चिन्त्यं मुहुर्मुहुः ।4.18। >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > kaḥ kālaḥ kāni mitrāṇi ko deśaḥ kau vyayāgamau \| >
> 
> > 
> > kaś cāhaṃ kā ca me śaktiḥ iti cintyaṃ muhurmuhuḥ \|4.18\| >
> 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > "What is the *Zeitgeist*, the spirit of the times? Who really are my > friends? What is the nature of the land I am in? What really have I > gained, and what have I lost? Who am I in my context? What is my > strength?" -- One should think thus periodically. >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > We find that our answers to these questions, and how they change in > the course of our life, are the most insightful inputs into our > self-knowledge. Writing nearly 2000 years after our author, Richard > Bach said, "The simplest questions are the most profound : Where were > you born?Where is your home?Where are you going?What are you > doing?Think about these once in awhile, and watch your answers > change".  
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > राज्ञि धर्मणि धर्मिष्ठाः पापे पापाः समे समाः । >
> 
> > 
> > राजानम् अनुवर्तन्ते यथा राजा तथा प्रजाः ।13.8। >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > rājñi dharmaṇi dharmiṣṭhāḥ pāpe pāpāḥ same samāḥ \| >
> 
> > 
> > rājānam anuvartante yathā rājā tathā prajāḥ \|13.8\| >
> 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > "When the king is noble, so are the subjects. When he's wicked, so are > they. They follow their king in every way".
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > Another very famous verse. It is interesting to see how this plays out > in democracies, where rājā are prajā are ideally inverted. We don't > know if that has ever happened to the satisfaction of everyone > somewhere, but we are quite intimately familiar with what happens when > an inchoate mass of fickle impressions is made the ruler. A > commentator speaking about a recent megascam quipped about the culture > of pervasive corruption, 'yatha prajā tathā Raja' :-) >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > धर्माख्याने श्मशाने च रोगिणां या मतिर्भवेत् । >
> 
> > 
> > सा सर्वदैव तिष्ठेत् चेत् को न मुच्येत बन्धनात् ।14.6। >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > उत्पन्न पश्चात्तापस्य बुद्धिः भवति यादृशी । >
> 
> > 
> > तादृशी यदि पूर्वं स्यात् कस्य न स्यान् महोदयः ।14.7। >
> 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > dharmākhyāne śmaśāne ca rogiṇāṃ yā matirbhavet \| >
> 
> > 
> > sā sarvadaiva tiṣṭhet cet ko na mucyeta bandhanāt \|14.6\| >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > utpanna-paścāttāpasya buddhiḥ bhavati yādṛśī \| >
> 
> > 
> > tādṛśī yadi pūrvaṃ syāt kasya na syān mahodayaḥ \|14.7\| >
> 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > "The detachment that comes when listening to the Purāṇas, when > visiting a graveyard and when ill -- if only it lasted, who wouldn't > be free of bondage?" >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > "If only the clarity that appears during remorse had appeared earlier, > who wouldn't have become great?" >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > A couple of other short-lived *vairāgya*s are also popular: > prasava-vairāgya, speaking of the intolerable pain to the mother at > the time of birth, abhāva-vairāgya, the detachment that develops as a > defense action against scarcity. 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > Today's verse appears at the end of the work, in a surprisingly poetic > climax:
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > व्यालाश्रयापि विकलापि सकण्टकापि
> > 
> > 
> > वक्रापि पङ्किलभवापि दुरासदापि । >
> 
> > 
> > गन्धेन बन्धुरसि केतकि सर्वजन्तोः
> > 
> > 
> > **एको गुणः खलु निहन्ति समस्त-दोषान्** ।17.21। >
> 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > vyālāśrayāpi vikalāpi sakaṇṭakāpi
> > 
> > 
> > vakrāpi paṅkilabhavāpi durāsadāpi \| >
> 
> > 
> > gandhena bandhurasi ketaki sarvajantoḥ
> > 
> > 
> > **eko guṇaḥ khalu nihanti samasta-doṣān** \|17.21\| >
> 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > (vasanta-tilakā metre, 14 syllables per line)
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > "Even though infested with snakes, appearing mutilated, abounding in > thorns,
> > 
> > 
> > crooked, growing in slime and difficult to approach,
> > 
> > 
> > O Ketaki tree, your fragrance alone makes you a friend.
> > 
> > 
> > One good quality makes up for every fault" >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > In one stroke, Cāṇakya explains one of the most fundamental features > of humanity. David Nicholls once said, "There are ten or twenty basic > truths, and life is the process of discovering them over and over and > over". This idea is definitely up in that list. Virtually everything > we relate to as human behaviour has to do with this. Relationships? > Absolutely. Parental, fraternal, romantic, platonic -- all kinds of > bonds that would have otherwise been slowly corroded by mismatches are > stabilized by some one redeeming feature. If one were to look for a > logical best match, our bonds would change as fast as our moods do. > Patriotism? Of course. From Rama ("api svarṇamayī lankā na me lakṣmaṇa > rocate \| jananī janmabhūmiśca svargādapi gariyasī") to the [fond > reminiscences of > poets](http://thepoetryof.wordpress.com/2012/11/29/a-certain-south-indian-childhood/), > some features of one's homeland stand untouched by any consideration.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > How about art, creativity and the essentials of human continuity? By > every means. An old Greek proverb goes, "A society grows great when > old men plant trees whose shade they know they shall never sit in". > Why do they take the trouble to plant them? This same feature Caṇakya > extols. Some actual examples are in order. A sandalwood tree is almost > completely odourless for decades of its life. Only after 40 or 50 > years does it concentrate enough of the fragrance to be usable, and > even then, for high quality it has to age for 80 years or more. What > is assured is that no one who plants and cares for a sandalwood tree > will live to reap its benefits -- only the following generation can > take advantage of it. Sandalwood production is almost a barometer for > society's maturity -- only if a society is wise enough to think of its > future will it thrive. So far it has, which is most encouraging. > Another example: the temples of the Ellora caves took about 300 years > to build. The first sculptor chiseling away at the entrance had no > hope of seeing his art complete -- and yet, nearly 1500 years later, > we still marvel at them. >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > It is no different in the realm of literature. There has been a > tremendous amount of work connected with Sanskrit literature done in > regional Indian languages such as Kannada. Chakravarthi Srinivasa > Gopalacharya was a great scholar of Sanskrit of the past generation. > Starting in the 1960s, after nearly 30 years of toil, he published an > incredibly detailed Sanskrit-Kannada dictionary called > 'Śabdārtha-kaustubha' that almost borders on being an encyclopedia. > The greatest service one may offer to a language is to actively engage > in it, recount its great works and rejoice in its beauty -- and > Chakravarthi Srinivasa Gopalacharya's magnum opus does all this and > more, touching upon art, literature, linguistics, culture and history > as it defines, nay, *chronicles* words. Alas, in those times when > printing even a small book was a major project, due to severe > financial constraints he had to heavily abridge his work for > publication. Even after such abridgments, his work came to six volumes > totaling over 3000 pages. When we consider our own tradition -- here > we are, discussing a work of more than 2300 years ago and rejoicing in > the very same words (and perhaps even thoughts) as the very first man > who wrote it -- the tireless dedication of people to tasks that always > seemed to have that 'eko guṇaḥ' leads to the richness of the life > we're living.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > In a beautiful closing-of-the-loop, this verse applies to the work > itself. For all its faults, this one gem makes it worth reading the > whole thing :-) >
> 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 

A THOUGHT FOR TODAY:

> 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > The brilliant clarity of Cāṇakya's thought is manifest in this verse > from the Arthaśāstra: >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > नक्षत्रम् अति पृच्छन्तं बालम्अर्थोऽतिवर्तते \| >
> 
> > 
> > अर्थस्यार्थो हि नक्षत्रं किं करिष्यन्ति तारकाः ।9.4.26। >
> 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > nakṣatram ati pṛcchantaṃ bālam artho'tivartate \| >
> 
> > 
> > arthasyārtho hi nakṣatraṃ kiṃ kariṣyanti tārakāḥ \|9.4.26\| >
> 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > "Wealth ignores the fool who worries too much about astrology. Wealth > is its own star. What can far-away twinklers do?" >
> 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > What raw power! What certitude! What are we to think, when our > ancestors had such acuity, while today our elected leaders spend vast > sums of public money on vāstu re-adjustments? The cassandras that we > are, the most we can do is take recourse in eloquence; Dr. Warder, > commenting on the play Mudrārākṣasa in his masterful *Indian Kavya > Literature*says: (vol 3, page 277) >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 

> 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > > 
> > > > 
> > > > 
> > > > 
> > > > 
> > > > 
> > > > 
> > > > 
> > > > 
> > > > As long as India could produce Cāṇakyas, her civilization > > flourished, defended from the aggression of the *mlecchas*. When on > > the other hand she relied on simple, straightforward heroism and > > chivalry, as the ideal, her civilization was gradually destroyed by > > barbarous invaders. > > > > 
> > > > 
> > > > 
> > > > 
> > > > 
> > > > 
> > > > 
> > > > 
> > > > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 

> 
> >   
> > 

Please join the Google Group to subscribe to these (\~ weekly) postings:<https://groups.google.com/group/sadaswada/subscribe?hl=en>

  

