+++
title = "2013-02-18__21"

+++
[[Mohan K.V	2013-02-18, 01:57:22 [Source](https://groups.google.com/g/sadaswada/c/hwF4RxCDi9A)]]



**सदास्वाद**

  

दीपे प्रज्वलिते प्रणश्यति तमः किं दीपमात्रं तमः ?

  

(dīpe prajvalite praṇaśyati tamaḥ kiṃ dīpamātraṃ tamaḥ ?)

  

MEANING:

> 
> > "Darkness is destroyed by a lit lamp -- isn't all darkness then just a > matter of one lamp?". The first half uses the sati saptami > construction, which gives a meaning of either "When a lamp is lit, > \[darkness is destroyed\]", or a more urgent "*Just* as a lamp is > lit". The second half involves an difficult-to-translate use of > 'mātra'.'mātra' is a generic word with many meanings in context. > Commonly, it gives a sense of 'only' or 'after all' or 'the same > measure as'. Here, 'dīpamātra' means 'just a matter of one lamp' or > 'entirely measurable/manageable by one lamp'. In totality, the line > gives a David-vs-Goliath sense, of a tiny lamp being enough to destroy > mighty all-enveloping darkness. Whence does this arise, and who is > saying these brave words? Or, in the style of today's feature,कथम् > एतत्? (katham etat?) >
> 
> > 
> > 
> > 

CONTEXT:

> 
> > 
> > Today's phrase is taken from the Pañcatantraof Viṣṇuśarman. > Absolutely nothing, except his genius, is known about him. He is dated > to some time around 2500 years ago, and thePañcatantra is his only > known work. The only bit of information about him comes from a prelude > story in the work itself, where he is depicted as an old man who > teaches 3 wayward princes the arts of life. Their father the King is > overjoyed, and grants him whatever he wishes, but his immortal > response makes tome-long biographies redundant:नाहं विद्या-विक्रयं > शासनशतेनाऽपि करोमि ... किन्तु त्वत्-प्रार्थना-सिद्ध्यर्थं > सरस्वती-विनोदं करिष्यामि ।(nāhaṃ vidyā-vikrayaṃ śāsana-śatenā'pi > karomi ... kintu tvat-prārthanā-siddhyarthaṃ sarasvatī-vinodaṃ > kariṣyāmi ) "I will not sell my learning for even a hundred > land-grants... but to fulfill your request, I'll engage purely in > Sarasvatī-vinoda (pleasingSarasvatī, i.e teach for its own sacred > sake)". Isn't this the dream of everyone who is a true teacher at > heart?
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > ThePañcatantra is a cornerstone of human literature itself. Before > paper, printing and storage were even invented, thePañcatantra had > traveled the world several times and ensconced itself in the folk > tales of multiple civilizations. It was perhaps humanity's first > "international blockbuster hit". Everything from Aesop's fables which > shares many common stories, to Persian translations which led to > entire literary traditions, to multiple editions in all European > languages, was born out of this monumental work. Till the 20th > century, anyone who claimed to know a whit about the East would > assuredly have known about thePañcatantra and possibly even read it > in a translation.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > There are several reasons why this work caught man's imagination. The > first is a very deep and profound suffusion of universality. Not only > do we not really know who wrote it, we also can't say where or when > the story is happening. It could have been written by anyone, and > could happen anywhere or anytime before modern times. All stories > resonate harmoniously with this frame. So any reader who can imagine a > far away forest can plunge right in, and oh boy, did they! The idea of > animal characters, with readily recognizable stereotypes which were > still finely nuanced, was a greatly detailed shared context, with the > detail adding to the recognition and attraction (a monkey was foolish > in a different way than a donkey; a crane, evil differently from a > crocodile). The latent humor in characters breaking out into stories > to qualify their words is also consistently endearing. The sheer > intelligence of the plot twists were themselves the main calling, of > course.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > In the Sanskrit original, the list of attractions is even longer. One > gets a distinct impression that the author is a incredibly well-read, > jovial old man in a good mood sharing a funny but insightful story. > For example, the characters, especially the most despicable of them, > copiously quote the Mahabharata, Ramayana, Bhagavad Gita, technical > texts like Varahamihira's Jyotish-shastra, and even echoes of Kalidasa > and Bhartrhari! It's always a pleasant surprise to come across a wily > jackal, or a bedbug quoting a scripture one can recognize! Next, the > detailing goes to the level of the character names. A very delicate > and nice she-louse, whose bite is almost unrecognizable, is called > Manda-visarpiṇī ("mild mover"). A much less discreet and very brash > bedbug whose bite causes much pain, is called Agnimukha ("Fire > mouth"). A fly who is the protagonist's friend is given the lovely > name of Vīṇārava ("He with the sound of aVīṇā"). A bullfrog is called > Meghanāda ("Cloud roar"). Lastly, the simple beauty of Sanskrit shines > through. The prose is tight and unornamented, but this provides an > excellent backdrop for mock-heroism, sarcasm and distinct voicing. > Classic compound-words, like Kṣutkṣāmakaṇṭaḥ ("He with his throat > parched by hunger"), Catuṣkarṇa (meaning, "Secret", but literally, > "That which is heard by only four ears"), Anaikāntika (meaning > 'relative' or 'many-purposed'), Kopāṭopa-viśaṅkaṭa ("hideously puffed > up in anger") suffuse the work. Each story has tens of moral verses > that are clever, perceptive, and reusable anywhere.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > A word about a long-standing debate is perhaps in order. The question > of 'morality' in these stories has been hanging like a tattered veil. > For sure, there are several instances where the book surprises the > reader unpleasantly; 'good' characters lose, 'bad' characters win, and > lies, deception and deceit are very much present. Sacred verses are > quoted by cheats and frauds. Indeed, it got so controversial that many > translators have even added chapters where a final twist puts the > evil-doers to death, while no such comeuppance exists in the original! > To anyone expecting each story to end with a cleanly > bumper-stickerizable moral, perhaps to chant and be indignant with > modernity about, it is most certainly a disappointment. >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > ThePañcatantra is a far, far more intelligent work than that. Its > main motive appears to be to give a glimpse of the world as it is, in > all its complexity, goodness, petty badness, deep badness, innocence, > deceit and variety. It tries to grant, in Kalidasa's words, वृद्धत्वं > जरसा विना (Vṛddhatvaṃ jarasā vinā) "Wisdom without old age". Any moral > is for the reader to discern with his intelligence. The contradictions > in the work are very representative of the contradictions of life, > then and now. For example, every single Nītiśloka (moral verse) quoted > by every character, good or evil, is true and makes sense in its > context. There's no clean separation of good and evil, no overarching > justice delivered to the good and no driving forces except chance, > idiosyncrasies and intelligence -- exactly like in the real world. To > a weak mind, this concentrated dose of life, this "Total Perspective > Vortex" is destabilizing, depressing and hurtful; but to a strong, > discerning mind, it is necessary, joyous and greatly enriching.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > Today's verse is from a hilarious story involving a small bird and the > ocean. It appears in first book, Mitrabheda, and is numbered between > #15 to #20 in different editions. A confident Ṭiṭṭibha bird (commonly > translated as a 'plover', 'sandpiper' or 'strand bird'; essentially a > small bird that lives near sea shores) takes on the mighty ocean, and > wins! The story starts with the wife of theṬiṭṭibha requesting him to > find a good spot for her to lay her eggs. TheṬiṭṭibha suggests a > beautiful spot near the ocean. The wife is worried that the ocean is > too dangerous -- but theṬiṭṭibha pooh-poohs it with some grandiose > decree of his valour: >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > मत्तेभ-कुम्भ-विदलन-कृत-श्रमं सुप्तम् अन्तकप्रतिमम् । >
> 
> > 
> > यमलोक-दर्शनेच्छुः सिंहं बाधयति को नाम ? ॥ >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > mattebha-kumbha-vidalana-kṛta-śramaṃ suptam antakapratimam \| >
> 
> > 
> > yamaloka-darśanecchuḥ siṃhaṃ bādhayati ko nāma ? \|\| >
> 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > "Which fool, rushing to death's door, would dare trouble a mighty > lion, an image of Death itself, napping after a hearty meal of a wild > elephant's forehead meat?" \[i.e, the lion attacked the elephant > head-on, not like a coward from the back\] >
> 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > The hilarity of a tinyṬiṭṭibha saying this! Anyway, the wife agrees. > But the Ocean also hears this, and becomes angry. He decides to show > his power, and with just one wave takes away all the eggs. The wife is > distraught, and wails to theṬiṭṭibha about his foolish bravery. She > promptly launches into a sub-story of a foolish tortoise, and after > that another about three fish brothers.This is typical of the > interwovenness of the stories in thePañcatantra. These stories of > course are full of lovely moral verses and inner stories > themselves.She then strongly discourages him to develop any further > enmity with the mighty. >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > TheṬiṭṭibha isn't disturbed, andsprightlytells the wife,
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > भद्रे, तत् पश्य मे बुद्धि-प्रभावम् यावत् एनं दुष्ट-समुद्रं स्व-चञ्च्वा > शोषयामि ! येषां उत्साहशक्तिः भवति ते स्वल्पा अपि गुरून् विक्रमन्ते ।
> > 
> > 
> > bhadre, tat paśya me buddhi-prabhāvam yāvat enaṃ duṣṭa-samudraṃ > sva-cañcvā śoṣayāmi ! yeṣāṃ utsāhaśaktiḥ bhavati te svalpā api gurūn > vikramante \|
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > "My dear, just watch. I'll dry out this ocean with my very beak! Those > with enthusiasm can win over even the mighty!"
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > In classicPañcatantra fashion as the characters launch into a moral > verse, it says:aho sādhvidam ucyate ("Indeed, as it is well-told" or > "Indeed, it is told rightly that:" >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > हस्ती स्थूलतरः स चाङ्कुशवशः किं हस्तिमात्रोऽङ्कुशः ? >
> 
> > 
> > **दीपे प्रज्वलिते प्रणश्यति तमः किं दीपमात्रं तमः** ? >
> 
> > 
> > वज्रेणापि शताः पतन्ति गिरयः किं वज्रमात्रो गिरिः ? >
> 
> > 
> > तेजो यस्य विराजते स बलवान् -- स्थूलेषु कः प्रत्ययः ? >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > hastī sthūlataraḥ sa cāṅkuśavaśaḥ kiṃ hastimātro'ṅkuśaḥ ? >
> 
> > 
> > **dīpe prajvalite praṇaśyati tamaḥ kiṃ dīpamātraṃ tamaḥ ?** >
> 
> > 
> > vajreṇāpi śatāḥ patanti girayaḥ kiṃ vajramātro giriḥ ? >
> 
> > 
> > tejo yasya virājate sa balavān -- sthūleṣu kaḥ pratyayaḥ ? >
> 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > (śārdūlavikrīḍita, 19 syllables per line) >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > "An elephant is tamed by a mere hook -- isn't a hook then all an > elephant is?
> > 
> > 
> > Darkness is destroyed by a lit lamp -- isn't all darkness then just a > matter of one lamp? >
> 
> > 
> > A thunderbolt \[which isn't even material\] destroys the very > mountaintops -- isn't a mountain measured by just a thunderbolt?
> > 
> > 
> > Spirit alone gives strength -- what is the point of physical size?
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > The wife finally starts seeing his point of view, and as a helpful tip > tells the story of an elephant which was defeated by a sparrow, fly, > woodpecker and frog (the delightful names mentioned earlier are from > this story). In this story, a moral appears: >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > सुहृदि निरन्तरचित्ते गुणवति भृतेऽनुवर्तिनि कलत्रे । >
> 
> > 
> > स्वामिनि शक्तिसमेते निवेद्य दुःखं सुखी भवति ॥
> > 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > suhṛdi nirantara-citte guṇavati bhṛte'nuvartini kalatre \| >
> 
> > 
> > svāmini śakti-samete nivedya duḥkhaṃ sukhī bhavati \|\|
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > "A friend who understands, a wife of the same heart, a powerful lord > -- tell your woes to them, and you'll be happy". >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > TheṬiṭṭibha agrees, and calls a conference of all birds. He tells > them, quite calmly, that he's thinking of drying out the ocean with > his beak, and that he'd appreciate any help. Some birds grumble, but > they eventually tell him that they are powerless, but the King of > Birds, Garuḍa, the vehicle of Vishnu, may help. The birds then devise > a strategy that would warm the cockles of any modern-day politician's > heart. They go toGaruḍa and tell him, >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > अहो अब्रह्मण्यम् अब्रह्मण्यम्! अधुणा सदाचारस्य टिट्टिभस्य भवति नाथे > सति समुद्रेण अण्डानि अपहृतानि! तत् प्रणष्टम् अधुना पक्षिकुलम्! अन्येपि > स्वेच्छया समुद्रेण व्यापादयिष्यन्ते ! >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > aho abrahmaṇyam abrahmaṇyam! adhuṇā sadācārasya ṭiṭṭibhasya bhavati > nāthe sati samudreṇa aṇḍāni apahṛtāni! tat praṇaṣṭam adhunā > pakṣikulam! anyepi svecchayā samudreṇa vyāpādayiṣyante ! >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > "Oh Fie Fie! Even under your Lordship, the Ocean has dared to steal > this virtuousṬiṭṭibha's eggs! Bird-hood itself is endangered! The > Ocean can now wantonly kill any of us, citing precedent!" >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > They proceed to copiously quote several profound (real) scriptures > about the duties of a king, how he acquires a share of his subjects' > virtues and sins, what the characteristics of a good King are > (presently lacking), etc.Garuḍa buys it hook, line and sinker, and > becomes righteously indignant. He immediately throws a tantrum to > Vishnu, who happens to have an urgent appointment in Amarāvati. He > can't afford to miss his appointment for this trivial labour dispute, > and yet can't ignore his only vehicle's demands. So he decides to > solve it quickly with force -- he mountsGaruḍa, goes to the Ocean, > and issues a dire threat that he will dry it out unless it returns the > eggs. The Ocean quickly acquiesces and does as commanded, and everyone > lives happily ever after, and we pop back into the main story.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 

A THOUGHT FOR TODAY:

> 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > Just a little after this story, the evil Damanaka says this famous > verse in the master story:
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > उद्योगिनं पुरुषसिंहम् उपैति लक्ष्मीः >
> 
> > 
> > दैवेन देयम् इति कापुरुषाः वदन्ति । >
> 
> > 
> > दैवं निहत्य कुरु पौरुषम् आत्मशक्त्या >
> 
> > 
> > यत्ने कृते यदि न सिद्ध्यति कोऽत्र दोषः ॥ >
> 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > udyoginaṃ puruṣasiṃham upaiti lakṣmīḥ >
> 
> > 
> > daivena deyam iti kāpuruṣāḥ vadanti \| >
> 
> > 
> > daivaṃ nihatya kuru pauruṣam ātmaśaktyā >
> 
> > 
> > yatne kṛte yadi na siddhyati ko'tra doṣaḥ \|\| >
> 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > "Riches rush towards that lion of a man who actively tries -- >
> 
> > 
> > 
> > only cowards say, 'Fate has to please'.
> > 
> > 
> > To hell with Fate -- be manly and use your own strength.
> > 
> > 
> > If, despite effort, one doesn't succeed, that's no fault!" >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > Even though these words come from one of the most evil characters in > the work, they are perfectly sensible and true. This is a tantalizing > feature of thePañcatantra -- one simply cannot brand words or > thoughts just because they happen to come from someone of one > stereotype. This verse, for example, is perhaps the single most > important exhortation to a society which even today is steeped in > fatalism and inaction.
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 

  

