+++
title = "2013-01-19__17"

+++
[[Mohan K.V	2013-01-19, 21:45:09 [Source](https://groups.google.com/g/sadaswada/c/NdRTtE0HEUM)]]



**सदास्वाद**

  

गन्तव्यमस्ति कियदित्यसकृत्ब्रुवाणा रामाश्रुणःकृतवती प्रथमावतारम्

  

("gantavyam asti kiyad?" ity-asakṛt bruvāṇā rāmāśruṇaḥ kṛtavatī prathamāvatāram)

  

MEANING:

> 
> > " 'How much farther?' -- asking thus again and again, she \[Sītā\] > caused Rāma to weep for the first time." In the first half 'she' is > actually 'she who was speaking thus', which compresses an entire > sentence into one participle; in the second, 'causeRāma to weep' is > literally 'caused the descent ofRāma's tears for the first time'. > This gives a lot of hints: presumably, they were already welling up > andRāma was holding them back for some reason; or perhaps > whatSītāsaid touched a part ofRāma's mind and he couldn't hold back > his emotions. How? Read on!
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 

CONTEXT:

> 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > Today's phrase is taken from the play Bālarāmāyaṇa of > Rājaśekhara.Rājaśekhara was a poet in the times of Emperor > Mahendrapāla of the Gurjara Pratihara Empire of 1200 years ago, and > was a noted poet, dramatist and literary critic. His works are among > the favorites of later literary critics and theorists like Mammata, > Kuntaka and Bhoja, who repeatedly quote his verses and observations.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > This play, one of the longest in all of Sanskrit with 10 long acts and > several mini-acts, is a retelling of the Rāmāyaṇa with several > interesting changes to the story. For example, Rāvaṇa turns up > atSītā's svayamvara and after failing to win her, takes a vow to kill > whoever does! Many such modifications and additions to the story are > made, and it is held that for the most part, the play manages to be > both familiar and surprising in the right amounts. 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > Today's phrase is taken from the 34th verse of the 6th act.Rāma has > been sent to exile, and Lakṣmaṇa andSītā had insisted on accompanying > him.Sītā had been especially adamant on going, even saying > thatAyodhyā was hell itself withoutRāma by her side. The city bids a > tearful adieu to its cherished son, and the streets wear a deserted, > desolate look.The minister Sumantra, well-sourced with information > from all quarters as wise ministers ought to be, describes to Emperor > Daśaratha the scene ofRāma leaving Ayodhyā: >
> 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > सद्यः पुरीपरिसरेऽपि शिरीषमृद्वी >
> 
> > 
> > गत्वा जवात्त्रिचतुराणि पदानि सीता । >
> 
> > 
> > **गन्तव्यमस्ति कियदित्यसकृत्ब्रुवाणा** >
> 
> > 
> > **रामाश्रुणः कृतवती प्रथमावतारम् ॥** >
> 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > sadyaḥ purī-parisare'pi śirīṣa-mṛdvī >
> 
> > 
> > gatvā javāt tri-caturāṇi padāni sītā \| >
> 
> > 
> > **"gantavyam asti kiyad" ityasakṛt-bruvāṇā** >
> 
> > 
> > **rāmāśruṇaḥ kṛtavatī prathamāvatāram** \|\| >
> 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > (Vasantatilakā metre, 14 syllables per line)
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > "Still close to the city, the delicate, mildSītā, >
> 
> > 
> > walked with vigour for a couple of steps.
> > 
> > 
> > 'How much farther?' -- asking thus again and again, 
> > 
> > 
> > shecaused Rāma to weep for the first time" >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > This delicate picture-in-words is a veritable treasure-trove of human > emotion. How firm the resolve ofRāma was when he calmly accepted his > exile! As we saw a few editions ago, his low priority for his own > comfort has some versions even have him rushing to console Kaikeyi! > Such a stance could only come from a clear, refined knowledge of the > consequences of his actions, coupled with a steadfastness to face > what's coming to him. This one act of selflessness alone probably > contributes a major part to our conception of the idealRāma. >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > Rājaśekhara performs a masterstroke by contrasting this strict, > detached adherence to an impersonal principle of ethics with the > innocent, mild and child-like tenderness ofSītā. In this verse,Rāma, > who is almost God-like in his capacity to do the right thing with no > regard to himself, and who is a kind of Ideal Man we all are meant to > *strive* to be, meets a very humanSītā who represents an element of > natural human innocence that in present in us just the way we *are*.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > Note well thatSītā's resolve to go to the forest was no less brave > than Rama's was. In fact, given that it was done *entirely* of her own > accord in the face of opposition from everyone, it could even be > argued that it wasSītā who demonstrated better the principle of doing > the right thing. There is no doubt whatsoever thatSītā would face > everything that comes to her with the utmost fortitude; the question > is not one of how she would *respond*, but one of how she *feels*. > Here,Sītā doesn't know what she's signed up for. She doesn't know the > difficulties of the forest and losing every comfort she had got used > to from birth.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > Rama knows all this: knows all the troubles that she's going to face, > knows that she doesn't know what those troubles are, and that yet she > has agreed -- no, *demanded* to accompany Rama! On top of this, he > knows she will stand up to anything. This combination of innocence and > strength moves him to tears. An observer remarked that the moment we > cry in a film isn't when it's sad or tragic, but when it's tender, > kind and forgiving. Innocence has a way of breaking all our constructs > and reaching a place inaccessible to intelligence, rectitude, beauty > or power.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > There are a few reasonable objections about this verse, specifically > to the use of the word 'asakṛt' ('not once', ie. again and again). > Commentators like Kuntaka say that this is in poor taste for two > reasons: first, no matter how muchSītā felt like it, it doesn't fit > her perception to have actually asked, let alone ask multiple times. > That would be more akin to unthinking ignorance and childishness, not > atimorous,childlike innocence. Second -- and this is the more > poetically beautiful objection -- Rama would not have needed to hear > it more than once to be moved to tears! Therefore, Kuntaka suggests > that 'asakṛt' ought to be replaced by 'avaśam' ('involuntarily' or 'by > chance' or 'by a slip').
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > So much thought, and so many discussions have gone into the > appropriateness of *one word* in a verse written a millennium ago! And > yet, it's a worthy investment, because it's a verse that'll remain > beautiful as long as humans continue to encounter and be surprised by > genuine innocence :-) >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 

A THOUGHT FOR TODAY:

> 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > The Rāmāyaṇa is a rich source of the most lofty sentiments, of > glimpses of the very best of what we can be. One of the most famous > verses in it is part of Rāma's speech toVibhīṣaṇa, Rāvaṇa's sole > surviving relative, afterRāvaṇa has been killed.Vibhīṣaṇahesitates > to performRāvaṇa's last rites, thinking that a man so bent on doing > evil as him does not deserve them.Rāma instantly corrects him, and in > the guise of requesting for a favor from him, recountsRāvaṇa's good > side, and asks this:
> > 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > मरणान्तानि वैराणि निर्वृत्तं नः प्रयोजनम् ।
> > 
> > 
> > क्रियतामस्य संस्कारो ममाप्येष यथा तव ॥ >
> 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > maraṇāntāni vairāṇi nirvṛttaṃ naḥ prayojanam \|
> > 
> > 
> > kriyatāmasya saṃskāro mamāpyeṣa yathā tava \|\|
> > 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > "All rivalry ends in death; our purpose here is fulfilled (ie. we > harbor no ill feelings anymore). Please perform his last rites -- he > is as much mine as he is yours". >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > The face-value meaning of the poem is exalted enough -- the principle > of respect to all, and that of giving up enmity when one's purpose is > achieved. But there's a layer of social context that makes it even > more appreciable. In times when a person had number of dependents, > especially so for a mighty king likeRāvaṇa, the last rites had > immense value in giving closure and in starting out on the path to > stability. In that sense, it was a gesture of great honor and respect > thatRāma offered to even his mortal enemy.
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 

  

  

