+++
title = "2013-01-10__16"

+++
[[Mohan K.V	2013-01-10, 22:51:21 [Source](https://groups.google.com/g/sadaswada/c/tYo9Ia3R7EU)]]



**सदास्वाद**

  

अगूढभावापि विलोकने सा न लोचने मीलयितुं विषेहे

  

(agūḍha-bhāvāpi vilokane sā na locane mīlayituṃ viṣehe)

  

MEANING:

> 
> > "Even though her look hid no secrets, \[Draupadi\] couldn't even bear > to blink". This is a classic contrast set-up, with one half of the > contrast being described with an adjectival noun, and the second half > with a normal verb. "vilokane agūḍha-bhāvā" is literally "\[She > whose\] look hid no emotion". The emotion was unrestrained in > expression, but the *person* feeling it was so restrained that 'locane > api na mīlayituṃ viṣehe' ("couldn't even bear to blink"). Why? Read > on!
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 

CONTEXT:

> 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > Today's phrase is taken from the work Kirātārjunīya of Bhāravi. This > is one of the five canonical mahākāvyas (a specialized kind of epic > poetry). In a way, it forms a 'golden mean' of the genre: The first > two by Kālidāsa (Raghuvaṃśa, Kumārasaṃbhava) are held to be of a > completely different, higher, more original kind of creation, and it > is sometimes wondered if themahākāvya genre was inspired by them > instead of the other way round; the later two (Māgha'sŚiśupāla-vadha > andSriharṣa'sNaiśadha-carita) are clearly written with an intent of > surpassing then-extant works (like Kirātārjunīya) in mind, and are > sometimes overly artificially ornate.
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > We're forced back into the familiar grounds of ignorance when it comes > to the poet. He's placed at roughly a millennium-and-half behind our > times, and no other work of his has survived. Except for a few > apocryphal anecdotes here and there, everything we know of him is in > this work.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > Before we get to a precis, it is apt to review the epic tradition in > Sanskrit. There are three wellsprings of epic narration that tradition > draws from -- the Rāmāyaṇa, the Mahābhārata, the Bṛhatkathā. Of these, > the former two are quite well known and well preserved, while the last > is available only in fragments via derivative works. At their core, > these streams consist of a narrative with hundreds of characters, with > only about a few tens of them playing central roles. A later epic poet > picks up a particular event in one of these streams, and builds up a > more detailed story with more events and side-narratives. Usually, > this particular event is of minor consequence in the main epic stream, > and so the additions of the later poet simply adds more detail without > any loss of coherence. For example, the names and broad outlines of > the story of Duṣyanta and Śakuntalā first appear in theMahābhārata; > however, they are of no consequence to the main story and are just > distant ancestors of the main characters.Kālidāsa picked up this > minor story and built a magnificent masterpiece around it. One can > 'click through' the story in the Mahābhārata, readKālidāsa's > masterpiece, and 'pop back' into theMahābhārata and proceed as if > nothing except a happy excursion happened. The epic poet, of course, > introduces his own set of minor events and characters, and the > tradition is all set to grow recursively.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > This kind of growth produces a fundamentally different universe than > the one we're used to in modern times. Our modern reading can be > likened to the study of a TV screen. Its very nature is dynamic, and > there is neither an expectation nor an effort to make any *image* > last. The *impressions* *of those images on us* is the only element > preserved to any degree, and any universality, shared experience or > discussions happens around them. One cannot even recall the last 5 > articles (the staple unit of present consumption) one has read, > because it's probably 5 out of 50 just last week. There is some > accumulation, although it remains to be studied how exactly it > happens.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > The epic tradition, on the other hand, is like the night sky seen from > a dense forest. Works of poets likeBhāravi are eternal stars which > have remained the same for millennia. It is no less intricate, > beautiful or profound than the most well-tuned TV screen, but there's > a fundamental element of *staticness* to it. The same stars were > observed by generations of connoisseurs, and they referred to them and > built a shared context that gave great depth to the simplest feature. > A line from an epic would have appeared in hundreds of 'quotable > contexts', anthologies, commentaries, reviews, parodies, letters, and > diaries; some continue to modern times, with a line from the Rāmāyaṇa > serving as an editor's clever rebuke to the government at a time of > severe censorship; many sections would have been translated verbatim > into the canonical great works of regional languages. Forget each > work, each *phrase*has a dense story behind it, the collected > reflections of one facet of one star in millions of thought-pools. > Some of these stories are themselves stylized, and become great works > on their own -- the Bhojaprabanda, for example, is a collection of > imagined anecdotes of great Sanskrit poets till the 10th century, and > is a fascinating work in its own right.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > With this framework in mind, let's consider the present work. > TheKirātārjunīya picks up from theMahābhārata the story of Arjuna > getting divine weapons from Indra andŚiva. The Pāṇḍavās have lost > everything in the game of dice, their wife Draupadī has been inhumanly > humiliated and they've been exiled to the forest for 14 years. They > still take it in their stride, and go about their lives waiting for > the period of exile to end, after which they expect to go to > Hastināpura and get back their rightful share of land. However, their > spies tell a different story. One day in the middle of their > forest-stay, the preceptor, Sage Vyāsa, arrives and warns them that > the Kauravas don't intend to concede even an inch of land. He suggests > that they spend their time preparing for war, and recommends that > Arjuna go to the Himalayas and perform austerities to acquire divine > weapons. The story continues from there, but we pause here for today's > verse.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > It sinks into everyone that Arjuna would have to leave them for > several years, and all are sad. Everyone eventually comes to terms > with the fact that it's for their best -- everyone exceptDraupadī. It > was she who was most anxious about winning back her honor and the > kingdom in war, but the consequences of that terrible revenge mean > separation from her dearest husband for an indefinite period. The poet > says, "ekaugha-bhūtaṃ tad aśarma kṛṣṇāṃ vibhāvarīṃ dhvāntam iva > prapede" -- "sadness left \[the four brothers\], and descended on her > as a concentrated darkness": >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > तुषारलेखाकुलितोत्पलाभे
> > 
> > 
> > पर्यश्रुणी मङ्गलभङ्गभीरुः । >
> 
> > 
> > **अगूढभावापि विलोकने सा** >
> 
> > 
> > **न लोचने मीलयितुं विषेहे ॥** >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > tuṣāra-lekhā-kulitotpalābhe
> > 
> > 
> > paryaśruṇī maṅgala-bhaṅga-bhīruḥ \| >
> 
> > 
> > agūḍha-bhāvāpi vilokane sā
> > 
> > 
> > na locane mīlayituṃ viṣehe \|\| >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > (upajāti metre, 11 syllables per line)
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > "Like a water lily covered with dew,
> > 
> > 
> > her eyes filled with tears; however, fearing bad omens,
> > 
> > 
> > even though her look hid no secrets,
> > 
> > 
> > she couldn't even bear to blink" >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > Shedding tears when one's beloved is about to leave is considered very > inauspicious. Poor Draupadi is worried that if she blinks, her tears > will fall as a bad omen to Arjuna! >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > The greatness of a poet is how he captures the smallest of actions and > identifies its universal elements. Just consider all that's going > through Draupadi's mind now: rage at the humiliation she's suffered; > the burning desire for revenge; and yet, the sad, sad prospect of > separation; a recourse to superstition at a weak moment; the feeling > that she's brought all this on herself, and all the internal struggles > between her emotions and intellect that follow -- all this in a > precariously perched tear drop :-)
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 

A THOUGHT FOR TODAY:

> 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > Perhaps the only counterpoint in intensity in the Sanskrit ethos to > the acrimony between a woman and her mother-in-law is the respect and > adulation of the *husband* by his in-laws. There's even a ditty that > goes, "asāre khalu saṃsāre sāraṃ śvaśuramandiram --haro himālaye > śete, hariḥ śete mahodadhau!" (In this joyless world, there is but one > source of solace -- the father-in-law's house. Why, even the gods > agree: Shiva lives in the Himalayas (his consort Parvati is the > daughter of Himalaya) and Vishnu lives in the ocean (his consort > Lakshmi was born of the ocean)!). An apocryphal anecdote attributes to > Bhāravi a special awareness of the limitations of this concept: > onceBhāravi was so angry with his father for not recognizing his > talents and instead constantly chiding him as a fool, that he decided > to kill him. Just as he was about to do so, he overheard his father > praising him with great critical appreciation to someone, and > commenting that he didn't want to spoil his son with direct > praise.Bhāravi was very remorseful, and went to apologize. His father > smiled, and as expiation, asked him to stay at his father-in-law's > place for six months. Bhāravi thought he got off easy -- till his > experiences made him pen this verse:
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > श्वशुर-गृह-निवासं स्वर्ग-तुल्यो नराणाम् >
> 
> > 
> > यदि निवसति दिवस-त्रीणि वा पञ्च सप्त ।
> > 
> > 
> > मधु-दधि-घृत-धारा-क्षीर-सार-प्रवाहः
> > 
> > 
> > तदुपरि दिनमेकं पादरक्षा-प्रहारः ॥
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > śvaśura-gṛha-nivāsaṃ svarga-tulyo narāṇām >
> 
> > 
> > yadi nivasati divasa-trīṇi vā pañca sapta \|
> > 
> > 
> > madhu-dadhi-ghṛta-dhārā-kṣīra-sāra-pravāhaḥ
> > 
> > 
> > tadupari dinamekaṃ pādarakṣā-prahāraḥ \|\|
> > 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > "The in-laws' place is heaven indeed, >
> 
> > 
> > If one stays three days or five.
> > 
> > 
> > It's milk and honey and every need -- >
> 
> > 
> > One day more and the boots arrive." >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > Perhaps it was for the best --Bhāravi can now enjoy gems like, "I > bought my Mother-in-law a chair for Christmas, but she wouldn't plug > it in." :-) >
> 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 

