+++
title = "2013-04-21__Romanthaḥ - 7"

+++
[[Mohan K.V	2013-04-21, 22:07:54 [Source](https://groups.google.com/g/sadaswada/c/DCDx_oeydTs)]]



**सदास्वादरोमन्थः**  

  

> 
> > Dear readers,
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > Many thanks for your continued support, and for writing back with > feedback, opinions and suggestions. We're very grateful for the > interest shown in our humble endeavor!
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > In #28, when talking about all-powerful Fate, we had referred > toBhartrhari's verse "रात्रिर्गमिष्यति भविष्यति सुप्रभातम्..." and > some of you asked for details. The full verse is:
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > रात्रिर्गमिष्यति भविष्यति सुप्रभातम् >
> 
> > 
> > भास्वान् उदेष्यति हसिष्यति पङ्कजश्रीः। >
> 
> > 
> > इत्थं विचिन्तयति कोशगते द्विरेफे >
> 
> > 
> > हा हन्त हन्त नलिनीं गज उज्जहार॥ >
> 
> > 
> >  style="font-size:12.727272033691406px;font-family:arial,sans-serif"> >
>   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > rātrir gamiṣyati bhaviṣyati suprabhātam >
> 
> > 
> > bhāsvān udeṣyati hasiṣyati paṅkajaśrīḥ\| >
> 
> > 
> > itthaṃ vicintayati kośa-gate dvirephe >
> 
> > 
> > hā hanta hanta nalinīṃ gaja ujjahāra\|\| >
> 
> > 
> >  style="font-size:12.727272033691406px;font-family:arial,sans-serif"> >
>   
> > 
> >  style="font-size:12.727272033691406px;font-family:arial,sans-serif"> >
> 
> > A bee is inside a lotus when nightfall happens, and the lotus flower > closes. The bee is gentle, and doesn't want to bore its way out. It > starts thinking, >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > "This night will pass; a beautiful morning will dawn
> > 
> > 
> > The sun will rise and the beauty of this lotus will smile again" >
> 
> > 
> > -- Just as the bee was thinking thus,
> > 
> > 
> > Oh! No! No! An elephant tore away everything. >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > The bee and its melodious plans (all in the future tense, with a > sonorous repetition of -ishya) represent man's fond dreams for the > future. The elephant is all-powerful fate. In just one line (the 4th), > the mood changes from one of fond expectation to a poignant tragedy. > This is easily one of the most fascinating portraits-in-verse in > Sanskrit!
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > Śatāvadhāni Dr. R. Ganesh commented that Bhallata had a very unique > style of handling the Sanskrit idiom. The combination of incisive > observation, legerdemain with ornate writing and multiple layers of > suggestion place him among the all-time greats like Bana and Bharavi.
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > In version #27, in an aside, we had mentionedVijñāneśvara's > commentaryMitākṣara was "meant to be an academic exercise where the > author explained his interpretation of the text". Naturally, when > talking of completely different eras, the connotations of a phrase > like 'academic exercise' become crucial. The tail begins to wag the > dog, and hidden meanings become more important than original ones -- > today, 'academic' is often a code-word to mean 'useless' or 'isolated > in an ivory tower' or '*completely* disconnected from the real world'; > this is not true when it comes to the Mitākṣara. This commentary had a > multitude of inputs from the customs and traditions of the day, and > was very much linked to the reality and perceptions of its time. Many > thanks to Śatāvadhāni Dr. R. Ganesh for his suggestions into this.
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > As always, we welcome any thoughts, feedback and suggestions from you > all. Please email us > at[kvm....@gmail.com]()and[shree...@gmail.com]() >
> 
> > 
> > 

> 
> >   
> > 

A THOUGHT FOR TODAY:

  

> 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > It is a common fact that recollections and memories are often sweeter > than the events which inspired them: >
> 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > गतकालः सदा पुण्यो गतकालः सदा सुखः । >
> 
> > 
> > स्मृतिः मृत-महिष्यास्तु शतातिद्रोणदोहना ॥
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > gatakālaḥ sadā puṇyo gatakālaḥ sadā sukhaḥ \| >
> 
> > 
> > smṛtiḥ mṛta-mahiṣyās tu śatāti-droṇa-dohanā \|\| >
> 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > "A past time is always righteous and happy. The dead buffalo is > remembered to have given a hundred gallons of milk daily!" >
> 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 

Please join the Google Group to subscribe to these (\~ weekly) postings:<https://groups.google.com/group/sadaswada/subscribe?hl=en>

> 
> > 
> > 
> > 
> >   
> > 
> > 
> > 
> > 

