+++
title = "00 Meta"

+++
## TABLE OF CONTENTS
- TRANSLATOR’S INTRODUCTION
- INTRODUCTION

### BOOK I -- THE LOSS OF FRIENDS
- THE LOSS OF FRIENDS
- THE WEDGE-PULLING MONKEY
- THE JACKAL AND THE WAR-DRUM
- MERCHANT STRONG-TOOTH
- GODLY AND JUNE
- THE JACKAL AT THE RAM-FIGHT
- THE WEAVER’S WIFE
- HOW THE CROW-HEN KILLED THE BLACK SNAKE
- THE HERON THAT LIKED CRAB-MEAT
- NUMSKULL AND THE RABBIT
- THE WEAVER WHO LOVED A PRINCESS
- THE UNGRATEFUL MAN
- LEAP AND CREEP
- THE BLUE JACKAL
- PASSION AND THE OWL
- UGLY’S TRUST ABUSED
- THE LION AND THE CARPENTER
- THE PLOVER WHO FOUGHT THE OCEAN
- SHELL-NECK, SLIM, AND GRIM
- FORETHOUGHT, READYWIT, AND ATALIST
- THE DUEL BETWEEN ELEPHANT AND SPARROW
- THE SHREWD OLD GANDER
- THE LION AND THE RAM
- SMART, THE JACKAL
- THE MONK WHO LEFT HIS BODY BEHIND
- THE GIRL WHO MARRIED A SNAKE
- POOR BLOSSOM
- THE UNTEACHABLE MONKEY
- RIGHT-MIND AND WRONG-MIND
- A REMEDY WORSE THAN THE DISEASE
- THE MICE THAT ATE IRON
- THE RESULTS OF EDUCATION
- THE SENSIBLE ENEMY
- THE FOOLISH FRIEND

### BOOK II - THE WINNING OF FRIENDS
- THE WINNING OF FRIENDS
- THE BHARUNDA BIRDS
- GOLD’S GLOOM
- MOTHER’S SHANDILEE’S BARGAIN
- SELF-DEFEATING FORTHTHOUGHT
- MISTER DULY
- SOFT, THE WEVER
- HANG BALL AND GREEDY
- THE MICE THAT SET ELEPHANTS FREE
- SPOT’S CAPACITY

### BOOK III - CROWS AND OWLS
- CROWS AND OWLS
- HOW THE BIRDS PICKED A KING
- HOW THE RABBIT FOOLED THE ELEPHANT
- THE CAT’S JUDGEMENT
- THE BRAHMAN’S GOAT
- THE SNAKE AND THE ANTS
- THE SNAKE WHO PAID CASH
- THE UNSOCIAL SWANS
- THE SELF SACRIFICING DOVE
- THE OLD MAN WITH THE YOUNG WIFE
- THE BRAHMAN, THE THIDF, AND THE GHOST
- THE SNAKE IN THE PRINCE’S BELLY
- THE GULLIBLE CARPENTER
- MOUSE-MAID MADE HOUSE
- THE BIRD WITH GOLDEN DUNG
- THE CAVE THAT TALKED
- THE FROGS THAT RODE SNAKEBACK
- THE BUTTER-BLINDED BRAHMAN

### BOOK IV - LOSS OF GAINS
- LOSS OF GAINS
- THE MONKEY AND THE CROCODILE
- HANDSOME AND THEODORE
- FLOP-EAR AND DUSTY
- THE PLOTTER MILITANT
- THE JACKAL WHO KILLED NO ELEPHANTS
- THE UNGRATEFUL WIFE
- KING JOY AND SECRETARY SPLENDOR
- THE ASS IN THE TIGER-SKIN
- THE FARMER’S WIFE
- THE PERT HEN-SPARROW
- HOW SUPERSMART ATE THE ELEPHANT
- THE DOG WHO WENT ABROAD

### BOOK V - ILL-CONSIDERED ACTION
- ILL-CONSIDERED ACTION
- THE LOYAL MUNGOOSE
- THE FOUR TREASURE-SEEKERS
- THE LION-MAKERS
- HUNDRED-WIT, THOUSAND-WIT, AND SINGLE-WIT
- THE MUSICAL DONKEY
- SLOW, THE WEAVER
- THE BRAHMAN’S DREAM
- THE UNFORGIVING MONKEY
- THE CREDULOUS FIEND
- THE THREE-BREASTED PRINCESS
- THE FIEND WHO WASHED HIS FEET


## Pub note
Ever since the dawn of civilisation, ever since man first realised the imperative need to know himself and, through that self-knowledge, to win friends and influence people so to secure his own happiness and well-being no less than those of his fellowmen, the Panchatantra stories have unfailingly offered him significant and dynamic aid.

In terms of historical time, these stories have been current among the Indian populace for at least five thousand years, probably longer. Nor has their popularity been limited exclusively to the confines of the Indian subcontinent, where the stories first found their origin. They have been told and retold, with perhaps a twist here and a turn there, among other peoples in other lands; in other climes and in other tongues — in short, among all peoples of the world through more than twenty centuries.

And at all times, the end purport of the *Panchatantra*, if not its form and setting, has remained the same; to reveal to man, woman or child, through the fascinating medium of ‘legless fables’ that basic knowledge and wisdom which makes one’s life richer, happier and fuller.

The original collection of the *Panchatantra* stories, in Sanskrit, numbered about eighty-four. But in their endless travel through the ages in India and abroad, these stories underwent many chanes not only in regard to their form, colour and setting, but even as to their total numerical strength. One such ‘maimed and transformed’ version of the *Panchatantra* was among the earliest printed books in Europe, in the German language. An earlier version, also garbled, in the English language, came from Caxton’s printing press.

But until almost a hundred years ago no authorised or literal translation of the *Panchatantra* existed in any European language. For the first time in 1859 Theodor Benfey, the noted German Sanskrit Scholar, provided a literal and faithful translation in the German language, of the Kashmir recension of the Panchatantra collection -- a recension which has been recognised by Oriental scholars as the most authoritative in existence.

Two English translations of the *Panchatantra* were made --the first in 1924 by Stanley Rice, and the second by Arthur W. Ryder, the well-known American Oriental Scholar. Of these two, Ryder’s translation has rightly come to be regarded as the better one; in fact, it is the best of all existing *Panchatantra* translations in any foreign language.

Ryder’s *Panchatantra*, first pubished in America about twety years ago, found a large circle of friends and admirers in India. But the book soon went out of print; the need for a new edition, at a price within the reach of all, has long since been evident. It is in answer to this long-felt need and in the belief that an ounce of sense contained in the *Panchatantra* is better than a ton of scholarship \(not contained it?\) that the Publishers have ventured to offer the present edition to the Indian reading public.

The Publishers





## TRANSLATOR’S INTRODUCTION





I

One Vishnusharman, shrewdly gleaning

All worldly wisdom’s inner meaning,

In these five books the charm compresses

Of all such books the world possesses.

*---*INTRODUCTION TO THE *Panchatantra*

The *Panchatantra* contains the most widely known stories in the world. If it were further declared that the *Panchatantra* is the best collection of stories in the world, the assertion could hardly be disproved, and would probably command the assent of those possessing the knowledge for a judgement. Assuming varied forms in their native India, then traveling in translations, and translations of translations, through Persia, Arabia, Syria, and the civilized countries, brought delight to hundreds of millions.

Since the stories gathered in the Panchatantra are very ancient, and since they can no longer be ascribed to their respective authors, it is not possible to give an accurate report of their genesis, while much in their subsequent history will always remain obscure. Dr. Hertel, the learned and painstaking editor of the text used by the present translator, believes that the original work was composed in Kashmir, about 200 B.C. At this date, however, many of the individual stories were already ancient. He then enumerates no less than twenty-five recensions of the work in India. The text here translated is late, dating from the year 1199 A.D.

It is not here intended to summarize the history of these stories in India, nor their travels through the Near East and through Europe. The story is attractive — whose interest is not awakened by learning, for example, that in this work he makes the acquaintance of one of La Fontaine’s important sources? Yet here, as elsewhere, the work of the “scholars” has been of somewhat doubtful value, diverting attention from the primary to the secondary, from literature itself to facts, more or less important, about literature. The present version has not been made by a scholar, but by the opposite of a scholar, a lover of good books, eager, so far as his powers permit, to extend an accurate and joyful acquaintance with the world’s masterpieces. He will therefore not endeavor to fell the history of the Panchatantra, but to tell what the *Panchatantra* is.

II

Whoever learns the work by heart,

Or through the story-teller’s art

Becomes acquainted,

His life by sad defeat — although

The king of heaven be his foe —

Is never tainted.

---INTRODUCTION TO THE *Panchatantra*

The *Panchatantra* is a niti-shastra, or textbook of *niti*. The word niti means roughly “the wise conduct of life.” Western cvilization must endure a certain shame in realizing that no precise equivalent of the term is found in English, French, Latin, or Greek. Many words are therefore necessary to explain what niti is, though the idea, once grasped, is clear, important, and satisfying.

First of all, *niti* presupposes that one has considered, and rejected, the possibility of living as a saint. It can be practiced only by a social being, and represents an admirable attempt to answer the insistent question how to win the utmost possible joy from life in the world of men.

The negative foundation is security. For example, if one is a mouse, his dwelling must contain recesses beyond the reach of a cat’s paw. Pleasant stanzas concerning the necessity of security are scattered throughout the work. Thus:

The poor are in peculiar need

Of being secret when they feed;

The lion killed the ram who could

Not check his appetite for food.

or again:

In houses where no snakes are found,

One sleeps; or where the snakes are bound:

But perfect rest is hard to win

With serpents bobbing out and in.

The mere negative foundation of security requires a considerable exercise of intelligence, since the world swarms with rascals, and no sensible man can imagine them capable of reformation.

Caress a rascal as you will,

He was and is a rascal still:

All salve- and sweating-treatments fail

To take the kink from doggy’s tail.

Yet roguery can be defeated; for by its nature it is stupid.

Since scamp and sneak and snake

So often undertake

A plan that does not thrive,

The world wags on, alive.

Having made provision for security, in the realization

A man to thrive

Must keep alive,

one faces the necessity of having money. The *Panchatantra*, being very wise, never falls into the vulgar error of supposing money to be important. Money must be there, in reasonable amount, because it is unimportant, and what wise man permits things unimportant to occupy his mind? Time and again the *Panchatantra* insists on the misery of poverty, with greatest detail in the story of “Gold’s Gloom” in the second book, never perhaps with more point than in the stanza:

A beggar to the graveyard hied

And there “Friend corpse, arise,” he cried;

“One moment lift my heavy weight

Of poverty; for I of late

Grow weary, and desire instead

Your comfort; you are good and dead.”

The corpse was silent. He was sure

‘Twas better to be dead than poor.

Needless to say, worldly property need not be, indeed should not be, too extensive, since it has no value in possession, but only in use:

In case of horse or book or sword,

Of woman, man or lute or word,

The use or uselessness depends

On qualities the user lends.

Now for the positive content of niti. Granted security and freedom from degrading worry, then joy results from three occupations -- from resolute, yet circumspect, use of the active powers; from intercourse with like-minded friends: and above all, from worthy exercise of the intelligence.

Necessary, to begin with, for the experience of true joy in the world of men, is resolute action. The difficulties are not blinked:

There is no toy

Called easy joy;

But man must strain

To body’s pain.

Time and again this note is struck — the difficulty and the inestimable reward of sturdy action. Perhaps the most splendid expression of this essential part of niti is found in the third book, in the words which the crow, Live-Strong, addresses to his king, Cloudy:

A noble purpose to attain

Desiderates extended pain,

Asks man’s full greatness, pluck, and care,

And loved ones aiding with a prayer.

Yet if it climb to heart’s desire,

What man of pride and fighting fire,

Of passion and of self-esteem

Can bear the unaccomplished dream?

His heart indignantly is bent

\(Through its achievement\) on content.

Equal stress is laid upon the winning and holding of intelligent friends. The very name of the second book is “The Winning of Friends”; the name of the first book is “The Loss of Friends.” Throughout the whole work, we are never permitted to be long oblivious of the rarity, the necessity, and the pricelessness of friendship with the excellent. For, indeed,

The days when meetings do not fail

With wise and good

Are lovely clearings on the trail

Through life’s wild wood.

So speaks Slow, the turtle, and Swift, the crow, expresses it thus:

They taste the best of bliss, are good,

And find life’s truest ends,

Who, glad and gladdening, rejoice

In love, with loving friends.

Last of all, and in a sense including all else, is the use of the intelligence. Without it, no human joy is possible, nothing beyond animal happiness.

For if there be no mind

Debating good and ill,

And if religion send

No challenge to the will,

If only greed be there

For some material feast,

How draw a line between

The man-beast and the beast?

One must have at disposal all valid results of scholarship, yet one must not be a scholar. For

Scholarship is less than sense;

Therefore seek intelligence.

One must command a wealth of detailed fact, ever alert to the deceptiveness of seeming fact, since oftentimes

The firefly seems a fire, the sky looks flat,

Yet sky and fly are neither this nor that.

One must understand that there is no substitute for judgement, and no end to the reward of discriminating judgement:

To know oneself is hard, to know

Wise effort, effort vain;

But accurate self-critics are

Secure in times of strain.

One must be ever conscious of the past, yet only as it offers material for wisdom, never as an object of brooding regret:

For lost and dead and past

The wise have no laments:

Between the wise and fools

Is just this difference.

This is the lofty consolation offered by a woodpecker to a hen-sparrow whose eggs have been crushed by an elephant with the spring fever. And the whole matter finds its most admirable expression in the noble words of Cheek, the jackal:

What is learning whose attaining

Sees no passion wane, no reigning

Love and self-control?

Docs not make the mind a menial,

Finds in virtue no congenial

Path and final goal?

Whose attaining is but straining

For a name, and never gaining

Fame or peace of soul?

This is niti, the harmonious development of the powers of man, a life in which security, prosperity, resolute action, friendship, and good learning are so combined as to produce joy. It is a noble ideal, shaming many tawdry ambitions, many vulgar catchwords of our day. And this noble ideal is presented in an artistic form of perfect fitness, in five books of wise and witty stories, in most of which the actors are animals.

III

Better with the learned dwell,

Even though it be in hell

Than with vulgar spirits roam

Palaces that gods call home.

-- *Panchatantra*, Book II

The word Panchatantra means the “Five books,” the Pentateuch. Each of the five books is independent, consisting of a framing story with numerous inserted stories, told, as fit circumstances arise, by one or another of the characters in the main narrative. Thus, the first book relates the broken friendship of the lion Rusty and the bull Lively, with some thirty inserted stories, told for the most part by the two jackals, Victor and Cheek. The second book has as its framing story the tale of the friendship of the crow, the mouse, the turtle, and the deer, whose names are Swift, Gold, Slow, and Spot. The third book has as framing story the war between crows and owls.

These three books are of considerable length and show great skill in construction. A somewhat different impression is left by Books IV and V. The framing story of Book IV, the tale of the monkey and the crocodile, has less interest than the inserted stories, while Book V can hardly be said to have a framing story, and it ends with a couple of grotesque tales, somewhat different in character from the others. These two shorter books, in spite of the charm of their contents, have the appearance of being addenda, and in some of the older recensions are reduced in bulk to the verge of extinction.

The device of the framing story is familiar in oriental works, the instance best known to Europeans being that of the *Arabian Nights*. Equally characteristic is the use of epigrammatic verses by the actors in the various tales. These verses are for the most part quoted from sacred writings or other sources of dignity and authority. It is as if the animals in some English beast-fable were to justify their actions by quotations from Shakespeare and the Bible. These wise verses it is which make the real character of *Panchatantra*. The stories, indeed, are charming when regarded as pure narrative; but it is the beauty, wisdom, and wit of the verses which lift the *Panchatantra* far above the level of the best storybooks. It hardly needs to be added that in the present version, verse is always rendered by verse, prose by prose. The titles of the individual stories, however, have been supplied by the translator, since the original has none.

The large majority of the actors are animals, who have, of course, a fairly constant character. Thus, the lion is strong but dull of wit, the jackal crafty, the heron stupid, the cat a hypocrite. The animal actors present, far more vividly and more urbanely than men could do, the view of life here recommended - a view shrewd, undeceived, and free of all sentimentality; a view that, piercing the humbug of every false ideal, reveals with incomparable wit the sources of lasting joy.

ARTHUR W. RYDER

BERKELEY, CALIFORNIA  
July, 1925





## 00 INTRODUCTION



One Vishnusharman, shrewdly gleaning

All worldly wisdom’s inner meaning,

In these five books the charm compresses

Of all such books the world possesses

And this is how it happened.

In the southern country is a city called Maidens’ Delight. There lived a king named Immortal-Power. He was familiar with all the works treating of the wise conduct of life. His feet were made dazzling by the tangle of rays of light from jewels in the diadems of mighty kings who knelt before him. He had reached the far shore of all the arts that embellish life. This King had three sons. Their names were Rich-Power, Fierce-Power, Endless-Power, and they were supreme blockheads.

Now when the king perceived that they were hostile to education, he summoned his counselors and said: “Gentlemen, it is known to you that these sons of mine, being hostile to education, are lacking in discernment. So when I behold them, my kingdom brings me no happiness, though all external thorns are drawn. For there is wisdom in the proverb:

Of sons unborn, or dead, or fools,

Unborn or dead will do:

They cause a little grief, no doubt;

But fools, a long life through.

And again:

To what good purpose can a cow

That brings no calf nor milk, be bent?

Or why beget a son who proves

A dunce and disobedient ?

Some means must therefore be devised to awaken their intelligence.”

And they, one after another, replied: “O King, first one learns grammar, in twelve years. If this subject has somehow been mastered, then one masters the books on religion and practical life. Then the intelligence awakens.”

But one of their number, a counselor named Keen, said: “O King, the duration of life is limited, and the verbal sciences require much time for mastery. Therefore let some kind of epitome be devised to wake their intelligence. There is a proverb that says:

Since verbal science has no final end,

Since life is short, and obstacles impend,

Let central facts be picked and firmly fixed,

As swans extract the milk with water mixed.

“Now there is a Brahman here named Vishnusharman, with a reputation for competence in numerous sciences. Intrust the princes to him. He will certainly make them intelligent in a twinkling.”

When the king had listened to this, he summoned Vishnusharman and said: “Holy sir, as a favor to me you must make these princes incomparable masters of the art of practical life. In return, I will bestow upon you a hundred land-grants.”

And Vishnusharman made answer to the king: “O King, listen. Here is the plain truth. I am not the man to sell good learning, for a hundred land-grants. But if I do not, in six months’ time, make the boys acquainted with the art of intelligent living, I will give up my own name. Let us cut the matter short. Listen to my lion-roar. My boasting arises from no greed for cash. Besides, I have no use for money; I am eighty years old, and all the objects of sensual desire have lost their charm. But in order that your request may be granted, I will show a sporting spirit in reference to artistic matters. Make a note of the date. If I fail to render your sons, in six months’ time, incomparable masters of the art of intelligent living, then His Majesty is at liberty to show me His Majestic bare bottom.”

When the king, surrounded by his counselors, had listened to the Brahman’s highly unconventional promise, he was penetrated with wonder, intrusted the princes to him, and experienced supreme content.

Meanwhile, Vishnusharman took the boys, went home, and made them learn by heart five books which he composed and called: \(I\) “The Loss of friends,” \(II\) “The Winning of Friends,” \(III\) “Crows and Owls,” \(IV\) “Loss of Gains,” \(V\) “Ill-considered Action.”

These the princes learned, and in six months’ time they answered the prescription. Since that day this work on the art of intelligent living, called Panchatantra, or the “Five Books,” has travelled the world, aiming at the awakening of intelligence in the young. To sum the matter up:

Whoever learns the work by heart,

Or through the story-teller’s art

Becomes acquainted,

His life by sad defeat -- although

The king of heaven be his foe --

Is never tainted.



