+++
title = "12 Maṇḍala movements"

+++
## *Maṇḍalas*

1\. I have now properly described Cārīs in connexion with the use of weapons (lit. release of missiles). [Now] learn about Maṇḍalas arising out of a combination of Cārīs.

2-3. The aerial Maṇḍalas are: Atikrānta, Vicitra, Lalitasañcara, Sūcividdha, Daṇḍapāda, Vihṛta, Alāta(-ka), Vāmaviddha, Lalita and Krānta.

3-5. The earthly Maṇḍalas are Bhramara, Āskandita,[^mg1] Āvarta, Samotsarita, Eḍakākrīḍīta, Aḍḍita, Śakaṭāsya, Adhyardha(-ka), Piṣṭakuṭṭa and Cāṣagata. Listen about their description.


[^mg1]:  Mss. sometimes give this name as āspandita which seems to be a corruption for āskandita. Cf. The note 1 on XI. 7-9.

## *Aerial Maṇḍalas*

6-9. Atikrānta—the right foot [to be moved successively] in the Janitā Cārī and [the Śakaṭāsyā Cārī in which the breast is] Udvāhita, the left foot in the Alātā Cārī and the right foot in the Pārśvakrāntā Cāri, (next) the left foot in the Sūcī Cārī and the right foot in the Apakrāntā Cārī, [again] the left foot [successively] in the Sūcī Cārī and [the Bhramarī Cārī by] turning the Trika, (then) the right foot in the Udvṛitta Cārī and the left foot in the Alātā Cārī which should be changed (lit. divided) to the Bhramarī Cārī, again this left foot in the Alātā Cārī and the right foot in the Daṇḍapāda Cārī.

10-13. Vicitra—the right foot [successively to be moved] in the Janitā Cārī and in the Talasañcara[^mg2] (Nikuṭṭana), manner, (then) the left foot in the Syanditā Cārī, the right foot in the Pārśvakrāntā Cārī, (again) the left foot in the Bhujaṅgatrasitā Cārī and the tight foot [successively] in the Ātikrāntā and Udvṛttā Cārīs, (next) the left foot in the Sūcī Cārī, the right foot in the Vikṣitpā (Ākṣiptā) Cārī and the left foot in the Apakrāntā Cārī.


[^mg2]:  See Ag.

14-17. Lalitasañcara—the right foot with the knee raised [to move] in the Sūcī Cārī, (next) the left foot in the Apakrāntā Cārī and the right one in the Pārśvakrāntā Cārī (again) the left foot [successively] in the Sūcī and the Bhramarī Cārīs [this latter by turning round the Trika] and the right foot in the Pārśvakrāntā Cārī and the left foot in the Atikrāntā Cārī which is to be changed (lit. divided) into the Bhramarī Cāri.

18-19. Sūcīviddha—the left foot [to be moved] in the Sūcī and the Bhramarī Cārīs [the latter by turning the Trika round], the right foot in the Pārśvakrāntā Cārī, the left foot in the Ātikrāntā Cārī, next the right foot in the Sūcī, the left foot in the Apakrāntā Cārī and the right foot again in the Pārśvakrāntā Cārī.

20-22. Daṇḍapāda—the right foot to be moved in the Janitā and the Daṇḍapāda Cārīs, the left foot in the Sūcī and the Bhramarī Cārīs [the latter by turning the Trika], (next) the right foot in the Ūrūdvṛttā Cārī and the left foot in the Alātā Cārī, (again) the right foot in the Pārśvakrāntā Cārī and the left foot [successively] in the Bhujaṅgatrastā and the Atikrāntā Cārīs to meet the right foot in the Daṇḍapāda Cārī and the left foot [successively] in the Sūcī and the Bhramarī Cārīs [the latter by turning the Trika].

23-26. Vihṛta—the right foot [to be moved] in the Janitā Cārī (then) its Nikuṭṭana, (next) the left foot in the Syanditā Cārī and the right foot in the Ūrūdvṛtta Cārī, (then) the left foot in the Alātā Cārī and the right foot in the Sūcī Cārī, again the left foot in the Pārśvakrāntā Cārī and the right foot in the Ākṣiptā and the Bhramarī [this by turning the Trika] and the Daṇḍapādā Carīs, (then) the left foot in the Sūcī and the Bhramarī Cārīs [the latter by turning the Trika] again the right foot in the Bhujaṅgatrasitā Cārī and the left foot in the Atikrāntā Cārī.

27-29. Alāta—the right foot [to be moved] in the Sūcī Cārī and the left foot in the Apakrāntā Cārī, then the right foot in the Pārśvakrāntā Cārī and the left foot in the Alātā Cārī, after moving by turn in these [two] Cārīs six or seven times with graceful steps, again the right foot in the Apakrāntā Cārī and the left foot [successively] in the Atikrāntā and the Bhramarī Cārīs.

30-33. Vāmaviddha—the right foot [to be moved] in the Sūcī Cārī, the left foot in the Apakrāntā Cārī, (then) the right foot in the Daṇḍāpādā Cārī and the left foot in the Sūcī Cārī and right foot in the Bhramarī [this by turning the Trika] and the Pārśvakrāntā, Cārīs, (next) the left foot in the Ākṣiptā Cārī and the right foot in the Daṇḍapādā and the Ūrūdvṛttā Cārīs, (then) the left foot [successively] in the Sūcī. the Bhramarī [this by turning the Trika] and the Alātā Cārīs, (next) the right foot in the Prāśvakrāntā Cārī and the left foot in the Atikrāntā Cārī.

34-37. Lalita—the right foot [to be moved] in the Sūcī Cārī and the left foot in the Apakrāntā Cārī, (then) the right foot in the Pārśvakrāntā and the Bhujaṅgatrasitā Cārīs, (then) the left foot in the Atikrāntā Cārī and the Ūrūdvṛttā Cārīs the left foot and the Alātā Cārī, and the right foot in the Pārśvakrāntā Cārī, next the left foot in the Atikrāntā Cārī with graceful steps.

38-40. Krānta—the right foot [to be moved] in the Sūcī Cārī and the left foot in the Apakrāntā Cārī, then the right foot in the Pārśvakrāntā Cārī and the left foot too in the same Cārī (Pārśvakrama), moving round alternately in these Cārīs in all directions, again the left foot in the Sūcī Cārī and the right foot in the Apakrāntā Cārī. This Maṇḍala is prescribed for a natural gait. Hence it is called Krānta *i.e*. going.

41\. These are the aerial Maṇḍalas. Now I shall describe those on the earth.

## *Earthly Maṇḍalas*

42-44. Bhramara—the right foot [to be moved] in the Janitā Cārī and the left foot in the Syanditā Cārī, than the right foot in the Śakaṭāsyā Cārī and the left foot to be stretched, (next) the right foot in the Bhramarī Cārī [by turning the Trika], again the left root in Syanditā Cārī and the right foot in the Śakaṭāsyā Cārī, then the left foot in the Apakrāntā (Apasarpī) Cārī and the Bhramarī Cārī by turning about the back.

45-47. Āskandita—the right foot [to be moved] in the Bhramarī Cārīs and the left foot in the Aḍḍitā and the Bhramarī Cārīs [the latter by turning the Trika], then the right foot in the Ūrūdvṛttā Cārī and the left foot in the Apakrāntā (Apasarpitā) and the Bhramarī Cārīs [the latter by turning the Trika then] the right foot in the Syanditā Cārī, (next) the left foot in the Śakaṭāsyā and the same foot to violently strike the ground.

48-50. Āvarta—the right foot [to be moved] in the Janitā Cārī and the left foot in the Talasañcara (Nikuṭtana) Cārī, then the right foot in the Śakaṭāsyā and the Ūrūdvṛttā Cārī, (next) the right foot the Atikrāntā (Apasarpī) Cārī turning backwards and the Cāṣagati Cārī, then the right foot in the Syanditā Cārī and the left foot in the Śakaṭāsyā Cārī, again the right foot in [the Bhramarī Cārī with the Trika turned round), and the left foot in the Apakrāntā (Apasarpī) Cārī.

51-53. Samotsarita—assuming first of all the Samapāda Sthāna, then stretching the two hands with their palms turned upwards, (next) their intermittant Āveṣṭana and Udveṣṭana movements, [then putting the left hand] on the waist, the right hand moved in the Āvartita manner [next the right hand to be put on the waist] and the left hand moved in the Āvartita manner, moving round alternately with this Cārī, will give rise to the Samotsarita Maṇḍala.

54-55.[^mg3] Eḍakākrīḍita—the two feet on the ground (to be moved successively) in the Sūcī and the Eḍakākrīḍita Cārīs, (next) the swift moving Bhramarī Cārī by turning the Trika, (then) moving (the feet) round alternately in the Sūcī and the Āviddha Cārīs. This will give rise to the Khaṇḍa-maṇḍala named Eḍakākrīḍita.


[^mg3]:  This khaṇḍamaṇḍala seems to be another name for eḍakākrīḍita.

56-58. Aḍḍitā—the right foot [to be moved] in the Udghaṭṭa manner and then (simply) moved round, next [to be moved] in the Syanditā Cārī and the left foot in the Śakaṭāsyā Cārī, next the right foot to be moved backwards in the Apakrāntā (Apasarpī) and the Cāṣagati Cārīs, (then) the left foot in the Aḍḍitā Cārī and the right foot in the Apakrāntā (Apasarpitā) Cārī (next) the left foot in the Bhramarī Cārī and the right foot in the Syanditā (Āsyanditā) Cārīs and to violently strike the ground.[^mg4]

59-60. Śakaṭāsya—The right foot (to be moved) in the Janitā Cārī, and next to move in the Talasañcara (Nikuṭṭana) manner, the same foot in the Śakaṭāsyā Cārī and the left foot in the Syanditā Cārī, moving round in this manner alternately with the Śakaṭāsyā Cārī. This Cārī Maṇḍala named the Śakaṭāsya is to be used in fight.


[^mg4]:  āsphoṭana—padatalena bhūmitāḍanam (Ag.).

61-62. Adhyardha—the right foot (to be moved successively) in the Janitā and Syanditā Cārīs, then the left foot in the Apakrāntā (Apasarpitā) Cārī and the right foot in the Śakaṭāsyā Cārī. Moving around alternately in these Cārīs, will be the Cārī Maṇḍala named Adhyardha to be used in personal combat.

63-64. Piṣṭakuṭṭa—The right foot (to be moved) in the Sūcī Cārī and the left foot in the Apakrāntā (then) the right foot in the Bhujaṅgatrasitā Cārī and the left foot too in the same Cārī. Thus going round in the Bhujaṅgatrasitā Cārī is known as the Cārī Maṇḍala named the Piṣṭakuṭṭa to be used in personal combat.

65\. Cāṣagata—Going round with feet in the Cāṣagatā Cārī is called the Cārī Maṇḍala named Cāṣagata. It is to be used in personal combat.

66\. Here I have described in brief the Maṇḍalas arising out of the various Cārīs, Now I shall describe Samā Cārīs.

67\. The use of the Samā Cārīs are known as Samā Maṇḍalas. [An actor] using them is to follow the instruction of the master-actor.

68\. These Maṇḍalas to be used in fight and personal combat, are to be performed with sportiveness and graceful movements of limbs, and should be accompanied by [suitable] instrumental music.

Here ends Chapter XII of Bharata’s Nāṭyaśāstra, which treats of the Rules about Maṇḍalas.


