+++
title = "2014-01-12__Romanthaḥ - 14"

+++
[[Mohan K.V	2014-01-12, 18:52:21 [Source](https://groups.google.com/g/sadaswada/c/daFuzRlzF9I)]]



सदास्वादरोमन्थः

Dear readers,

  

Happy new year!! We wish the new year brings you the best of health, wealth and spirits.

  

We’ll resume in a couple weeks with our regular postings. Meanwhile, we finally have a unified draft copy of all Sadāsvāda editions combined, and are elated to share it with you! It is available as a publicly published Google document here: [http://goo.gl/c7cpSR](http://goo.gl/c7cpSR) 

  

In addition, it is also available for download as a PDF at a website that we’re starting to build: [http://sadasvada.com](http://sadasvada.com)

  

In making this text, we corrected as many errors as we could find, and integrated the comments we received from our readers as best as we could; we’re sure that there still exist several errors -- typographical, factual and conceptual -- and we would very much appreciate your kindness in pointing them out to us. The Google document has a facility for any reader to leave a comment on any line; comments by email are also most welcome. As we have remarked many times, the Internet is our sole means of being connected to our audience; there is almost no chance for us to know how we’re doing other than via our readers’ patient feedback, and therefore, we humbly solicit your thoughts, on any aspect of the work whatsoever.

  

We’ll wait a few weeks, and formally publish on an electronic platform (like Amazon or Google Play). In parallel, we will look to bring out a physically published copy as well, though given that the work is longer than 600 pages in most hardcover formats, that process can take some months. We will keep you posted through out.

  

Many well-meaning readers suggested that we put up the posts as a blog as well. We’ll slowly do this on our website, and add other resources to it along the way. Your suggestions are always welcome.

  

As always, we welcome any thoughts, feedback and suggestions from you all. Please email us at [kvm....@gmail.com]() and [shree...@gmail.com]()

  

## Parting Thought

  

The ‘comma-sniffing donkey work’ involved in an activity seemingly so simple as collating pre-written chapters together on a computer, has granted us an especial appreciation for this ancient verse that can be found at the end of several palm-leaf manuscripts:

  

भग्न-पृष्ठ-कटि-ग्रीवं स्तब्ध-दृष्टिर् अधो-मुखम् ।

कष्टेन लिखितं ग्रन्थं यत्नेन परिपालयेत् ॥

bhagna-pṛṣṭha-kaṭi-grīvaṃ stabdha-dṛṣṭir adho-mukham \|

kaṣṭena likhitaṃ granthaṃ yatnena paripālayet \|\|

  

“With stooping back and drooping neck,

Dulling eyes and head a wreck,

This work was written, taking many a hit, 

Kind reader, please, care for it.”

  

Our thanks to Prof. Pramod Viswanath for pointing us to this verse.

  

Please join the Google Group to subscribe to these (\~ weekly) postings:

[https://groups.google.com/group/sadaswada/subscribe?hl=en](https://groups.google.com/group/sadaswada/subscribe?hl=en)  

