+++
title = "Mukta-bodha tAntrika influence"
+++

Literary Works
Courtly poetry and plays include important evidence of tantric adepts, rituals, deities, magical practices, and alchemical recipes. Set in fictional or legendary narratives, with exaggerated details, dramatic flourishes, and tropes in service of an array of literary effects, these literary works can sometimes serve as rich sources on tantric lore and observances. While parallels can be found in tantric scriptures, there are occasionally details not attested in other textual sources that supplement our knowledge of early tantric systems of worship.

Two seventh-century works by Bāṇa are exemplary: the Harṣacarita and the Kādambarī. The first includes a vivid description of an adept named Bhairavācārya, and the latter contains abundant references to the propitiation of Mahākāla, Caṇḍikā, and Mother Goddesses. The Gauḍavaho of Vākpatirāja, a Prakrit courtly eulogy of the eighth-century king Yaśovarman, makes ambiguous reference to “kaula” women, and Daṇḍin’s Daśakumāracarita features an episode involving a malevolent Śākinī. In the Mālatīmādhava of Bhavabhūti, early practices of invoking and interacting with yoginīs are woven through the storyline. The ninth-century Haravijaya of Ratnākara contains one of the earliest references to the Trika tradition in Kashmir and details aspects of Śaiva Siddhānta, and another literary work from that region, the Haracaritacintāmaṇi, includes descriptions of regional sites of tantric practice. The satires of the poet Kṣemendra also caricature tantric practitioners, often with biting criticism and irony. The eleventh-century Kathāsaritsāgara, a compendium of tales also from Kashmir, features many stories of divine and human yoginīs, who become even more common as characters in later literary works, particularly the Yaśastilaka of the Jaina author Somadevasūri. This literary work from Andhra Pradesh also reveals technical knowledge of the Trika and parodies Kaula practices.

In addition to courtly poems, plays, and narrative literature, there are a number of works on literary theory and dramaturgy that are adjacent to tantric traditions. Here Abhinavagupta’s corpus on aesthetics is noteworthy. His commentary on the Nāṭyaśāstra, the Abhinavabhāratī, is a monumental contribution to the sciences of theater, music, and dance. Abhinavagupta not only displays vast knowledge of these technical fields and an impressive range of Sanskrit dramas, but also alters the constitution of the base text in order to situate this foundational treatise on nāṭya within a non-dual Śaiva cosmology. To accomplish this, he divides a chapter and rearranges their order so as to align the thirty-seven tattvas with each chapter of the restructured text. To make this alignment explicit, he commences each chapter with a benedictory verse that mutually invokes the topic of the chapter and the character of the corresponding ontic principle. A similar strategy is found in Abhinavagupta’s Dhvanyālokalocana, his principal work on Sanskrit literary theory, which frames each of its four chapters with one of the four levels of speech adapted from Bhartṛhari in earlier Śaiva tantric literature. Another text contributing to what might be called a “Śaiva poetics” is the Kāvyaprakāśanidarśana, a seventeenth-century commentary by Ānandabhaṭṭa. It begins by enumerating the thirty-six tattvas and then expounds this essential work of literary theory by alternating between glosses on technical details of poetic analysis and non-dual Śaiva readings.